VII. PROGRAM ENTRY 
REQUIREMENTS 
 Bachelor’s degree in Nursing 
 Paying the training and examination fees in full  
 Holding a valid Nursing License and classified Registered Nurse 
from SCFHS 
 At least one year of nursing experience in the acute nursing care 
unit prior to joining the program 
 Providing employer approval, if any, for full-time training and 
enrollment in the training program 
 English proficiency Result. Applicant should submit one of the 
followings: 
 (STEP: 64) Valid for 3 years;  
 (IELTS: 4.5) valid for 2 years;  
 (TOFEL: IBT 48-PBT 458) valid for 2 years 
 Letter of intent: The applicant should submit a letter of intent 
explaining why they want to join the program 
Please refer to the executive Policy of SCFHS on admission and 
registration.  
16 

17 
VIII. INTRODUCTION 
TO LEARNING 
OUTCOMES AND 
COMPETENCY-BASED 
EDUCATION 
Training should be guided by well-defined “learning objectives” that 
are driven by targeted “learning outcomes” of a particular program 
to serve specific specialty needs. Learning outcomes are supposed 
to reflect the professional “competencies” that are required for the 
tasks that trainees aim to be “entrusted” with upon graduation. This 
will ensure that graduates will meet the expected demands of the 
healthcare system and patient care in relation to their particular 
specialty. Competency-based education (CBE) is an approach of 
“adult-learning” that is based on achieving pre-defined, fine-
grained, and well-paced learning objectives that are derived from 
complex professional competencies.  
Professional competencies related to healthcare are usually 
complex and contain a mixture of multiple learning domains 
(knowledge, skills, and attitude). CBE is expected to change the 
traditional method of postgraduate education. For instance, the time 
of training, though a precious resource, should not be considered 
as a proxy for competence (e.g., the time of rotation in certain 
hospital areas is not the primary marker of competence 
achievement). Furthermore, CBE emphasizes the critical role of 
informed judgment in the learners’ competency progress, which is 
based on a staged and formative assessment that is driven by 
multiple workplace-based observations. Several CBE models, such 
as the National Competency Framework for Bachelor of Nursing 
Programs, 
have 
been 
developed 
for undergraduate 
and 
postgraduate education in healthcare. This particular framework 

has been used in this curriculum for multiple reasons. As it reflects 
the entry level to nursing for the newly graduated nurses, it also 
reflects the entry level of the oncology trainees to the specialty. In 
addition, this framework integrates three learning domains 
(knowledge, skills, and attitudes) that demonstrate nurses’ abilities 
to perform different nursing competencies. The following concepts 
enhance the implementation of CBE in this curriculum: 
 Competency: Competency is a cognitive construct that 
assesses the potential to perform efficiently in a given situation 
based on the standards of the profession. Professional roles 
(e.g., experts, advocates, communicators, leaders, scholars, 
collaborators, and professionals) are used to define competency 
roles in order to make them mendable for learning and 
assessment.  
 Milestones: Milestones are the stages of the developmental 
journey throughout the competency continuum. Trainees, 
throughout their learning journey, will be assisted in 
transforming 
from 
being 
novice/supervised 
to 
master/unsupervised practitioners. This should not undermine 
the role of supervisory/regulatory bodies toward malpractice of 
independent practitioners. Milestones are expected to enhance 
the learning process by pacing the training/assessment to 
match the developmental level of the trainees (junior vs. senior).  
 Learning Domains: Whenever possible, efforts should be 
directed to annotate the learning outcomes with the 
corresponding 
domain 
(K=Knowledge, 
S=Skills, 
and 
A=Attitude). You may have more than one annotation for a given 
learning outcome. 
 Content-area Categorization: It is advisable to categorize 
learning outcomes in broad content areas related to the practice 
of the profession. For example, diagnostic versus therapeutic, 
simple versus complex, and urgent versus chronic.  
 Trainees are expected to progress from the novice to the 
master’s level in a certain set of professional competencies. The 
National Competency Framework for Bachelor of Nursing 
Programs is a newly published and locally developed 
competency framework by the Nursing Professional Council of 
the Saudi Commission for Health Specialties (11). 
18 

19 
IX LEARNING AND 
COMPETENCIES 
1. Professionalism. 
The Oncology Diploma trainee will demonstrate accountability and 
responsibility for the delivery of nursing care that is consistent with 
the profession’s moral, ethical, legal, humanistic, and regulatory 
principles.  
2. Patient Centered Care. 
The Oncology Diploma trainee will deliver compassionate and 
coordinated care that recognizes patients’ preferences, values, and 
needs and respects the patient as an active partner in providing 
holistic, safe, and effective care. 
3. Evidence Based Practice and Research.  
The Oncology Diploma trainee will be able to conduct scientific and 
oncology-related studies focusing on pertinent aspects of nursing 
care. The trainee will also be able to use his/her expertise to 
appraise the available literature and make clinical decisions based 
on the best available evidence. 
4. Leadership and Management. 
The Oncology Diploma trainee will demonstrate leadership and 
management skills through critical thinking, ethical decision-
making, communication, collaboration, and adequate nursing 
interventions in providing culturally competent, cost-effective care 
for groups of clients across the wellness/illness continuum. 
5. Quality and Safety Management. 
The Oncology Diploma trainee will be able to identify basic quality 
and safety principles within the healthcare sector. In addition, the 
trainee will demonstrate proficiency in identifying and analyzing 
nursing quality indicators to minimize the chance of harm to patients 
and health care providers and improve the provided care based on 
nationally- and internationally-recognized benchmarks. 

6. Health Education and Promotion. 
The Oncology Diploma trainee will be able to identify the need of 
communities and individual patients related to health promotion and 
disease prevention. The trainee will also strive to promote healthy 
behaviors by providing health information and educational activities 
using reliable resources with respect to different age groups and 
cultural backgrounds. 
7. Communication and Information Technology. 
The Oncology Diploma trainee is expected to maintain effective 
verbal communication and interaction with patients, their families, 
and their co-workers. Moreover, the trainee is expected to take 
advantage of information technology to analyze and synthesize 
information in order to collaboratively make critical decisions that 
serve the best patient outcomes (National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine, 2015). 
Program Durations 
To obtain an Advanced Practice Clinical Nursing Diploma in 
Oncology, the candidate must fulfill the following requirements: 
 The required period for the completion of this program is two 
academic years. 
 The program consists of two academic years, excluding 
examination weeks.  
 A total of 40 teaching and clinical training hours must be 
completed each week (36 hours of clinical training and 4 hours 
of didactic classes). 
 Trainees may complete their clinical rotations through daily 
shifts of 8 or 12 hours (excluding lunchtime). 
Program Rotations 
As demonstrated in the following table, the first year of the training 
consists of seven rotations in both in-patient and out-patient units. 
There will be no elective or selective rotations during the first year. 
This is because trainees need to complete all the core clerkships 
prior to engaging in specialized services. 
20