ー
ENDOCR:NE ANID BREAST SURGERY
FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
Department of Surgery
I. INTRODUCTION
Operations for thyroid cancer and breast cancer are the most frequent procedures
done in the Department of Surgery at King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research
Centre (KFSH&RC). Throughout the years, a lot of outreach proiects have been
initiated to educate surgeons in the management of these diseases. However, these
efforts seem to be not enough since there are still a lot of re-operations needed for
both breast and thyroid cancer due to sub-optimal management. We believe that
one significant way in overcoming this problem is to create groups of surgeons in the
country with special education and interest for these patients.
Therefore, we see a Fellowship Program for Endocrine and Breast Surgery as an
important step in reaching this goal of creating national societies for these important
cancer diseases. lt will, then, be possible not only to make and agree on national
programs, but also to turn these into reality for the benefit of our patients.
II. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
We see and operate around 160 new thyroid cancer cases and about 350 new
breast cancer cases every year at KFSH&RC. This represents a large portion of all
cases in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia With the ever increasing number of such
cases every year, it is perceived that time will come when it would be impossible to
attend to all these. Besides, it will cost a lot to refer all these cases to KFSH&RC.
Training Saudi surgeons who will return and work in other hospitals will definitely
ease the load and help in the cost containment. Therefore, our aim is to train a
general surgeon in clinical, laboratory, and scientific aspects of the discipline of
endocrine and breast surgery (EBS). This will enable the surgeon to assume
associate or full consultant responsibility for the comprehensive management of
patients with endocrine or breast pathology requiring surgery and to provide a
consultative service to patients in other services. Additional training could be made
available to enable the prospective consultant to function at a more academic leve!.
III. PREREQUISITES
The applicant must have successfutty'completed training in an accredited residency
training program in General Surgery. He/she must have obtained a Saudi Specialty
Certification in GeneralSurgery or its equivalent.
‐
‐
2-

B
Opentive Training: The Fellow should take all opportunities to develop hidher
operative skills. Upon linishing the training, tho Fellow should have developed
good experience and skills in the following procedures:
o Thyroid resection
o Hemilhyroidectomy
o Total thyroidectomy
o Modified radical neck dissection
o Radical neck dissection
o Stemal spllt and mediastinal exploration
o Parathyroidectomy
o Bemoval of parathyroid adenomas
o Subtotalparathyroidectomy
o Parathyoidtransplantation
o Adrenalec'tomy
o Pancreatic exploration and removal of endocrine Pancreatic tumors
o Breast core biopsy
o Breast cuservative therapy
o Masteclorry (radical and modified radical)
o Axillary node dissection
o Reconstruction of breast (if ngcessary with assistance) after mastectomy
Endw;rinology: The Fellow will, through participation in combined clinics and *
conferences, ward rounds, etc., leam the physiology and patho-physiology
behind the surgically treatable digeases within the field of Endocrinology.
He/she will also leam to judge Pathology, Cytology, Radiology and Nuclear
Medicine reports. He/she will, thereby, be able to decide upon the choice of
prcper beafn€nt and the optimal follow-up program for the patient. The Fellow
will specifically gain knowtedge on the following:
o 1123 (l 13r) Thvroid Uotake Scan
o tra ill3ti Toiat eodi scan
o Octreotide Scan
o Technetium Scan
o MIBG Scan
o Endocrine tumor markers of all kinds and how to relate the interpretation of
the above investigations to physiology and pathophysiology (effect of TSH, F-
Ts, F-Tr, peptides, etc.)
o MRI
Pathology: The Fellow will spend one monlh in the Pathology Department and
will be able to see and discuss most of the endocrine and breast cytology and
pathology. Hdshe will also be able to leam to perform cytology.
Breast Cancer: Through the combined clinics o, Oncology and RadiothErapy, the
Fellow will leam about chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The weekly breast'
conference will help himiher leam how to orchestrate and explore the input of
{aQ trom Radiology, Pathology, Oncology and Surgery, and how to proledy
decide upon the optimal treatment plan and follow-up program tor ttr6 pitieits.
ー
（
）
‐
D.
-4-

