A. Knowledge:
The fellow must be oble to demonstrote both bosic ond clinicol knowledge in
the iopic oreos listed in the progrom conlent. These topic oreos ore necessorily
linked ond form o fromework for leorning ond knowledge ocquisition. The
knowledge components within eoch topic oreo include when opplicoble:
clinicol skills, differeniiol diognosis, diognostic iests, etiology, pothophysiology,
treotment/monogement issues including preventive heolth meosures,
complicotions of treotment, prognosis ond ony controversies in the oreo.
B. Clinlcol Skills
Fellows must ocquire the following clinicol ond technicol skills:
I . Mostery in obtoining complete ond relevont history ond physicol exominotion
ond iniegrotion of findings in ihe ossessment of o potient who is o condidote
for, or hos received kidney tronsplonlotion.
2. Mostery in obioining complete ond relevont hisiory ond physicol exominotion
ond integrotion of findings in the ossessment of o potient who is o condidote
for, or hos underwent donor nephrectomy.
3. Proficiency in the monogement of o potient with ocute ond chronic ollogroft
dysfunction.
4. Demonstroble skill in deoling with the psychosociol ond ethicol issues reloted
to kidney tronsplontotion, including the ethicol issues of orgon donotion ond
ollocotion.
5. Demonslroble knowledge of indicotions, risks, ond interpretotions of :
o. Renol biopsy findings
b. Anii-H LA oniibodies
c. Cross motch testing by conventionol ond flow cytomeiry techniques.
6. Fellows must be oble to competently ond sofely perform reol time ultrosound
guided renol ollogroft biopsy.
C. Colloborollon
Fellows ore expected to be copoble of colloboroting wiih other heolih core
providers:
Underslonding of the speciol noture of tronsplont multidisciplinory ieom work.
Demonstroble copocity to work effeciively in o multidisciplinory teom
environment for the monogement of potients wiih renol tronsplontotion.
Function creoiively with renol tronsplont surgeons.
Leorn to consult effectively with oiher physicions ond heolth core
professionols, including porticulorly tronsplont coordinotors, nurses, dietitions
ond sociol workers.
Contribute successfully to other interdisciplinory teom octivities.
Ａ
＆
　
Ｃ
Ｄ
2

D. Professionolism
Fellows must demonstrote the obility to convey high quolity medicol core with
honor, truthfulness ond considerotion ond to exhibit proper personol ond
interpersonol professionol behovior. The fellow must proctice medicine ethicolly
in consistency with the obligotions of o physicion ond must understond the bosic
principles of bioethics.
E. Scholorship
The fellow must leorn to grow, employ ond observe o personol plon for
coniinuing medicol educotion. The fellow must be oble to vitolly judge sources
of medicol informoiion ond demonstrole the obility to ossist the leorning of
polients, house stoff, medicol students ond other heolth professionols. The fellow
must develop the skill of contributing to the development of new knowledge,
wheiher by the performonce of quolity ossuronce reviews, cose reports or by
conducting on originol reseorch.
F. Communicotion
Fellows ore expected to:
I . Estoblish theropeulic reloiionships wiih potients/fomilies.
2. Obtoin ond synthesize relevont hisiory from potienis/fomilies/communities.
3. Listen effectively.
4. Discuss oppropriote informotion with potients/fomilies ond the heolth core
teom.
lV. AdmlsslonReouirements
A. The condidote must hove completed formol residency troining in internol
medicine ond must hove been oworded o Soudi Speciolty Ceriificote by the
Soudi Commission for Heolth Speciollies (SCHS), or its equivoleni.
B. The condidote must hove completed formol fellowship iroining in nephrology
ond or its equivolent.
C. The condidote must hove successfully completed o personol interview by
members of the renol tronsplont progrom.
V. Slruclure of lhe troinino proorom:
A. Durolion
3

The durotion of the fellowship progrom is one yeor. The progrom offers on
odditionol six months to one yeor of extro troining. This optionol extro troining
period is meont to further enhonce the clinicol ond/or the reseorch skills of
the fellow.
B. Trolnlng Copoclly:
One fellow will be occepted eoch yeor. An odditionol fellow moy be occepted
if deemed necessory.
C. Foculty Quollflcollons:
All foculty members ore fully quolified renol tronsploni consultoni occording
to KFSH&RC credentioling guidelines ond meet the criterio of the Americon
Society of Tronsploniotion ond United Network of Orgon Shoring os Tronsploni
Nephrologists.
VI. PROGRAM CONTENT:
I . Toolcs
I . Medicol evoluotion of renol tronsplont condidote(s).
o. Obtoining detoiled history ond physicol exominotion
b. Ordering loborotory ond rodiologicol investigotions relevont to tronsplont
evoluotion
c. lnterpretotion of history, physicol exominotion, tissue typing ond other
investigotions findings
d. ldentifying ihe etiology of originol kidney diseose
e. Risk ossessment of renol ironsplontotion ond recurrence of originol kidney
diseose
f. Screening ond evoluotion of molignoncy pre-tronsplontotion
g. Screening of infectious diseoses pre-tronsploniotion
h. Assessment of liver diseose in condidote(s) with virol hepotitis
i. Voccinotion pre-tronsploniotion
j. Evoluofion of cordiovosculor sysiem ond possible undiognosed or
diognosed coronory ortery diseose
k. Heolth educotion ond ossessment of odherence to medicol regimens
post tronsplontotion
2. Medicol evoluotion of living kidney donor condidote(s).
o. Obtoining detoiled history ond physicol exominotion
b. Ordering loborotory ond rodiologicol investigotions relevont to tronsplont
evoluotion

g. Controindicoiion for tronsplontotion in condidoie(s) with infections
h. Non-odherence to medicol regimen os controindicotion for
tronsplontotion
5. Fundomentols in tronsplont immunology
o. Bosic principles of immunology in solid orgon tronsplontotion
b. T-cell immunity
c. B-cell immunity
d. Mechonisms of ollogroft rejection
e. Role of onti-HLA oniibodies in ollogroft rejection
f. Allogroftoccommodotion
6. Acute ollogrofi rejections ond dysfunction
o. Diognosis ond treotment of ocute cellulor ollogroft rejeciion
b. Diognosis ond treotment of ocute ontibody medicoted ollogroft rejection
c. Monogement of deloyed groft function
d. Steroids sensitive vs. steroids resistont ollogroft rejections
e. Recunence of glomerulonephririts or originol diseose ond its monogement
f. Microongiopothichemolyticonemio
g. De-novo onti-GBM post tronsplontolion
h. Urinory lrocl infections post kidney/poncreos tronsplontotion
7. Post renol ond poncreos tronsploni surgicol complicoiions
o. Renol ortery thrombosis
b. Renol vein ihrombosis
c. Primory non-functioning groft
d. Urinory leoks
e. Urinory obstruction
f. Ureteric stenosis
g. Lymphoceles posi tronsplontotion
8. Chronic ollogroft dysfunciion.
o. Recunence of originol diseose
b. Chronic oniibody medicoted re.iection ond iis monogement
c. Chronic glomerulopothy ond iis monogement
d. Loie ocute cellulor rejections
9. Detection, prophyloxis ond monogement of tronsploni reloted infectious
diseoses, such os BK Virus Nephropothy, CMV ond other opportunistic
infections
o. Surveillonce of post tronsplont infections
b. CMV prophyloxis ond treotmeni
c. Urinory troct infections
d. BK virus Surveillonce ond monogement
e. Monogement of immunosuppression in infected host
6

f. Voccinotionposttronsplontotion
g. Monogement of virol hepotitis post kidney ond poncreos ironsplontoiion
I 0. Tronsplonl reloied molignoncies
o. Molignoncy screening post tronsplontotion
b. Monogement of immunosuppression in potients with diognosed
molignoncy
c. Role of EBV in lymphomo post tronsplontotion
I 1 . lmmunosuppressive medicotions
o. Selection of oppropriote lmmunosuppressive medicotion occording to
recipienis immunologic ond medicol risk profile
b. Side effects of vorious immunosuppressonl
c. Role of colcineurin inhibitors in ollogrofi dysfunction
d. lmmunosuppressont's metobolic risk
e. Drug toxicities ond its monifestotion
I 2. Combined kidney ond other solid orgon tronsplontotion
o. lndicotion for combined orgon tronsplontotion
b. Combined liver kidney tronsplontotion in decompensoted liver diseose
ond hereditory metobolic syndromes
c. Chronic kidney diseose in non+enol solid orgon tronsplontotion
13. Post tronsplont co-morbidities which include: cordiovosculor diseose,
diobetes, hypertension, metobolic bone diseose, onemio in both inpotient
ond ouipotient settings
o. Monogement of cordiovosculor diseose post tronsplontotion
b. Risk modificotion of coronory ortery diseose post tronsplontotion
c. Monogemeni of new onset diobetes post kidney ironsploniotion
d. Osteoporosis post tronsplontotion
e. Monogement of hyperlipidemio
f. Monogement of hypertension
g. Tertiory hyperporothyroidism post tronsplontotion
14. Highly sensitized renol tronsplont recipients
o. Deiection of onii-HLA ontibodies preJronsplonlotion
b. lndicotion for desensitizotion pre-kidney tronsplontotion
c. Applying vorious desensitizotion protocols in highly sensitized renol
tronsplont recipient(s)
d. Use of plosmo exchonge in highly sensitized renol tronsplont recipienl(s)
e. Use of immunoodsorption pre-tronsploniotion in highly sensitized renol
tronsplont recipient(s)
f. Treoiment of ontibody medioted rejection post tronsplontotion in highly
sensitized renol tronsploni recipient(s)
g. Proiocol kidney biopsy in highly sensitized renol tronsplont recipient(s)
7

I 5. ABO incompotible kidney tronsplontotion
lndicotion for ABO incompotible kidney tronsplontotion
Detection of isoogglutinin ontibodies pre-tronsplontotion
Preironsplont conditioning regimens
Surveillonce of post tronsplontoiion
Treotment of ontibody medicoted rejection in the conlext of ABO
incompoiible kidney tronsplontoiion
f. Protocol kidney biopsy in ABO incompotible kidney ironsplontotion
I 6. Orgon ollocotion strotegies
o. Principols of orgon ollocoiion
b. Role of Soudi Center of Orgon Tronsplontotion
Monogement of deceosed donor woiiing list oi KFSH&RC
Orgon shortoge
Strotegies io improve orgon occess to minority groups
I 7. Ethics of Orgon tronsplontotion
I 8. Cost issues in kidney ond poncreos tronsplonlotion
Moin Rototions
The iroining progrom consists of four mojor clinicol rototions: The pre-renol ond
poncreos tronsplont clinic (on outpotient ociivity) the hospitolized renol ond
poncreos tronsplonl potients (on inpotient octiviiy), the consultotion service ond
the post renol ond poncreos tronsplont clinic (on outpotient octivity). Eoch
rotoiion is stoffed by o senior (consultoni) tronsplont nephrologist ond o junior
(on ossistont or fellow) tronsplont nephrologist.
l. Pre+enol ironsplont clinic rototion (4 monthsl: the fellow will be directly
involved in the evoluotion of renol ond poncreos ironsplonl condidotes ond
potentiol living kidney donor condidote(s). Once the evoluoiion process is
completed, the fellow is responsible for presenting the condidote(s) ot the
renol ironsplont conference (o consensus group weekly meeting) for finol
opprovol.
2. lnootient rototion [3 months): the fellow is directly involved in the medicol
core of the renol ond poncreos tronsplonl poiient(s). The troinee will olso
serve os o primory member of the renol ond poncreos ironsplont teom who
porticipotes in the joint core of potients. All hospitolized renol ond poncreos
tronsplont potienis ore cored for jointly by stoff of renol tronsplont surgery ond
tronsplont nephrology.
3. lnootient Consultotion Service month): the fellow will provide under the
supervision of o consultont, consultotions for renol tronsplont recipients who
ore odmiited under other medicol services in the hospitol.
Ｏ
ｂ
ｃ
ｄ
ｅ
ｃ
ｄ
　
ｅ

During ihis rolotion, the fellow will spend on overoge of two weeks in the
immunopothology lob io goin experience in the iechnicol ospects ond
interpretotion of tissue typing ond differeni crossmoich techniques.
4. Post tronsolont clinic rotoiion (4 months): the fellow will be directly
involved in the post ironsplont monogement of renol ond poncreos
recipients. The troinee will be o primory teom member in delivering core
to renol ond poncreos tronsplont recipient(s) in the immediote posi renol
tronsplont clinic, urgent core clinic ond in the long term follow up clinic.
The fellow is expected to perform ien to twenty renol ollogroft biopsies.
Additionolly, the fellow must observe of leost three renol lronsplont
surgeries ond three kidney procurement procedures.
C. EducolionolActivitles
1. Core lectures (didoctic sessions) on kidney ond poncreos tronsplontoiion.
These core leciures ore held ot lhe beginning of eoch ocodemic yeor. They
ore delivered by the senior stoff of the renol ond poncreos ironsplont
progrom. The lopics thot ore covered include :
o. A brief review of tronsplont immunobiology
b. HLA testing ond crossmotching
c. An overview of immunosuppression
d. Review of renol ironsploni progrom immunosuppression protocol
e. Medicol ospecis of kidney ond poncreos tronsplontoiion
f. Surgicol ospects of kidney ond poncreos tronsplontoiion
2. Renol pothology conference. A weekly meeiing where oll renol tronsplont
biopsies ore reviewed by the tronsplont pothologists. lt is o procticol ond
semi-didoctic troining session where fellows ore troined on fhe interpretotion
of renol tronsplonl pothologies.
3. Renol ironsplont conference. A weekly meeting where oll renol ond
poncreos tronsplont condidotes ond potentiol living kidney donors ore
presented for opprovol by consensus. During this interoctive session, ihe
fellow will leorn the skills of oppropriote selection of condidotes ond the
scieniific justificoiion for excluding or opproving condidotes.
4. Journol club. A bi-monthly session where the fellow is expected to presenl o
minimum of five popers from peer reviewed journol.
Vll. Evoluolion ond Promolion
The fellow's level of competence ond performonce will be evoluoted of o
frequency determined by ihe Postgroduote Educoiion Committee ond ln ihe
monner os detoiled in the Policy for Fellowship Troining Progrom.

