 
 
 
TABLE CONTENTS  
  
  
SECTIONS  
I  
Introduction  
II  
General Objectives  
III  
Specific Objectives  
IV  
Admission Process  
A. Eligibility  
B. Acceptance and Appointment   
C. Clinical Privileging  
V  
Structure of the Training Program   
A. Duration  
B. Training Capacity   
C. Qualification  
D. Program Content  
E. Staff qualification  
F. Training Committee  
G. Program organization & Responsibility  
H. Appeal Mechanism  
I. Stress management   
J. Educational Program  
VI  
On Call Duties  
VII  
Performance Evaluation Process  
VIII  
Promotion  
IX  
Training Completion   
X  
Program Interruption  
XI  
Training Extension  
XII  
Leaves and Holidays  
XIII  
Activation Neurophysiology Can-Med Structure   
  
  
  
  
  
  
CLINICAL NEUROPHYSIOLOGY FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM   
  

 
 
  
 
 
Clinical Neurophysiology Fellowship Program  
Neurophysiology Section  
King Faisal Specialists Hospital & Research Center- Riyadh  
  
  
I. 
Introduction  
This fellowship is designed to provide advanced and comprehensive postgraduate education in 
the field of Clinical Neurophysiology.   Outstanding teaching staff and facilities support this 
training program.  The Research Center provides learning opportunities on basic and advanced 
research.  
  
  
  
II. General Objectives  
1. To train Neurophysiology Specialists that are greatly needed in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.  
2. To promote neurophysiology research in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  
  
  
  
III. Specific Objectives  
1. The trainee should be able to independently read, interpret and report 
Neurophysiological studies (electroencephalography, evoked potentials, nerve 
conductions and electromyography).  
2. The trainee should be able to handle all troubleshooting in the lab during inpatient and 
outpatient recording.  
3. The trainee should be able to construct a research proposal, collect data and publish 
results.  
  
  
  
IV. Admission Process  
A. Eligibility  
1. Candidates must have completed an accredited residency program in either adult or 
pediatric Neurology and must possess a Saudi Specialty certificate (or equivalent). 
Candidates who passed the written examination and are registered for final parts 
may also be accepted.   

 
 
  
  
E. 
Staff Qualification  
1. Dr. Amal Mokeem, MD, (Program director). Board certified clinical           
neurophysiologist and pediatrician.   
2. Dr. Bent Stigsby, MD, PhD, (Section head). Board certified clinical            
neurophysiologist.  
3. Dr. David MacDonald, MD, FRCP(C), ABCN. Board certified clinical           
neurophysiologist and neurologist.  
4. Dr. Iftetah Alhomoud, MD, Board certified clinical neurophysiologist and           
neurologist.  
5. Dr. Tariq Abalkhail, MD, Board certified clinical neurophysiologist and           neurologist.  
  
  
F. 
Training Committee:    
All scientific members have had contributed and reviewed the manual design and 
authorize it.  
  
The fellowship program committee will assist the program director in the planning, 
organization, and supervision of the program.  
1. This committee should include a representative from each participating site and 
each major component of the program.  
2. This committee will include representation from the fellows in the program; if there 
is more than one fellow in the program, at least one must be elected by his or her 
peers.  
3. The fellowship program committee will meet regularly, at least quarterly, and keep 
minutes that reflect the activity of the committee.  
4. The fellowship program committee will communicate regularly with members of the 
committee, the department or division, and fellows.  
5. The program director, assisted by the fellowship program committee and/or 
program subcommittees will plan, organize, and supervise the program.   
6. The program must provide opportunities for residents to attain all competencies as 
outlined in the objectives of training.   
7. The fellowship program committee or a subcommittee thereof will select candidates 
for admission to the program in their institution/center.  
8. The fellowship program committee or a subcommittee thereof will be responsible 
for the assessment of fellows and for the promotion of fellows in the program 
according to the Training Evaluation Report.  
  
  
  

 
 
G. 
Program Organization & Responsibility   
A. Program Director Responsibilities  
The fellowship program director shall be responsible for the following:  
1. Interview and recommendation for acceptance of fellow                   applicants.  
2. Orientation of fellows.  
3. Fellow’s registration with the SCHS (if applicable).  
4. Fellow’s compliance with the program curriculum.  
5. Planning and organizing fellow’s educational activities, including                    
monitoring of attendance, on call duty, rotation schedule, leaves,                      and 
monitoring of compliance with leave policy.  
8. Counseling of fellows.  
9. Administration of fellowship program examination.  
10. Choose the members of training committee.  
           
B. Consultant Staff  
1. The consultant staff will supervise the fellows closely, promoting proficiency in 
clinical skills and procedures pertinent to the subspecialty.  
2. The consultant staff will devote time to teaching fellows, monitor their 
performance and progress.  
3. Identify their weakness and provide counseling and guidance as necessary.  
4. The consultant staff will encourage research project.  
5. The consultant will participate in the evaluation of fellows.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
C. Fellow  
1. The fellows must be committed to the training program and must achieve 
competence in the subspecialty.  
2. They will participate in teaching and clinical research.  
3. It will be mandatory for the fellows to abide by the rules and regulation of the 
institution and the SCHS (including prompt compliance with registration, if 
applicable).  
  
  
H. 
Appeal Mechanism:  
1. The fellowship program committee will maintain and follow the appeal mechanism 
consistent with SCFHS policies.   

 
 
3. A training year will repeat if interrupted for any length of time between three and 
twelve months during the year.  The Fellow will repeat the training level at the 
beginning of the subsequent academic year.  
XI. 
Training Extension  
1. Training extension request is submitted to ATA six months prior to completion of the 
program.    
2. The overall performance evaluation and justification for extension must be 
accompanying the request.  
  
  
  
XII. 
Leaves and Holidays  
1. Fellows enrolled in SCHS Program are entitled for four weeks’ vacation annually and 10 
days of either Ramadan or Hajj holiday per year.  
1. Fellows are entitled to one paid professional leave each year (7days).  
2. Sponsored Fellows however are entitled to only paid professional leave during their 
training period.    
3. Fellow shall compensate for sick leave or maternity leave during or immediately after 
the training year.  
  
  
  
XIII. Activation Neurophysiology Can-Med Structure  
1. Please review our activated CAN-med. Structure of the Neurophysiology                  
Fellowship Program.  
  
  
  
NOTE  
1. For details please read fellowship training program policy manual-Academic and training 
affairs, KFSHRC.  
  
  
  
 

