resident should be assigned to a dedicated pediatrics surgery, operating rooms OR 
operating lists.  
The resident is expected to be involved in pediatric cases with complicated congenital 
conditions and major pediatrics procedures in neonatal and pediatrics age group, and to 
participate in general and regional techniques.  
If the weekly workload allows, the resident will be allocated to other ORs. 
Objectives: 
1. Medical Expert/Clinical Decision Maker
The resident will acquire an understanding of the anatomical, physiological, 
pharmacological, and psychological differences between the neonate, child and 
adolescent in relation to anesthesia practice. The resident must demonstrate knowledge 
concerning:  
a) Respiratory system
 Anatomic differences of the neonate and pediatric airway
 Age differences in respiration control, compliance, lung volume, oxygen
consumption 
 Neonatal postoperative apnea
b) Cardiovascular system
 Anatomy and physiology of transitional circulation
 Maturation of the myocardium and autonomic nervous system
 Normal vital signs for ages
c) Central nervous system
 Anatomy differences (e.g. fontanels)
 Age differences (e.g. intracranial pressure and cerebral blood flow and
auto-regulation) 
d) Genitourinary system
 Renal maturation
 Fluids and electrolytes, maintenance requirements, and hydration
e) Gastrointestinal/hepatic system
 Feeding and fasting guidelines

36 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
 Glucose control 
 Maturation of hepatic function  
 
f) Hematological system  
 Normal values in infants and children  
 Natural history of fetal hemoglobin  
 Blood component therapy  
 
g) Thermoregulation 
 Body surface area and heat loss  
 Differences and ability to thermoregulate  
 Heat loss and heat loss prevention  
 
h) Psychological issues  
 Anxiety/fear at different ages  
 Separation anxiety and parental anxiety  
 Use of premeditations 
  
i) Pharmacology 
 Pediatric induction techniques, inhalation, intravenous, and sedation 
 Ages difference in volume of distribution, pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacodynamics, and toxicity 
  
j) Pain management 
 Options of regional and neuraxial analgesia, and ultrasound guidance  
 Multimodal analgesic techniques 
 Differences in performing epidural blocking in children vs. adults  
 
k) Anesthesia equipment 
 Equipment specific to patient age and circuit ventilators  
 Mask sizes, ETT, LMA, laryngoscopy blades, bronchoscope, and GlideScope  
 Vascular access and invasive monitoring 
 Regional block equipment 
 Warming devices 
 
The resident will acquire the knowledge and understanding of coexisting disease in 
pediatric patients to aid providing anesthetic care for children. 
 
a) Full-term infants, former preterm infants and healthy children and adolescents 
presenting for common surgical procedures. The anesthetic management of 
neonates and premature infants. 

37 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
b) Cardiovascular disease (ASD, VSD, PDA, TOF) and repaired simple lesions:  
 Cardiomyopathy  
 Heart transplant recipients  
 Complex congenital heart disease (e.g. transposition of the great vessels, 
truncus arteriosis, single ventricle physiology, abnormal pulmonary venous 
return) 
 Postoperative (e.g.  Norwood, bicavopulmonary anastomosis, Fontan) 
 Obstructive lesion and pulmonary hypertension  
 
c) Respiratory disease  
 Upper respiratory tract infections  
 Asthma  
 Cystic fibrosis  
 Obstructive sleep apnea  
 Stridor, congenital and acquired (e.g. cystic hygroma, epiglottitis, croup, 
retropharyngeal abscess) 
 
d) Gastrointestinal disease  
 Hepatobiliary disease  
 Gastroesophageal reflux  
 Feeding disorders  
 
e) Neuromuscular disease  
 Hydrocephalus  
 Repaired spina bifida  
 Cerebral palsy  
 Muscular dystrophy  
 Mytonic dystrophy  
 Seizures disorders and developmental delay  
 
f) Infections 
 Hepatitis, tuberculosis, HIV 
 
g) Endocrine and metabolic 
 Diabetes  
 Thyroid  
 Obesity  
 Mitochondrial disease, mucopolysaccharidosis, lactic acidosis  
 
h) Hematological/malignancies  
 Anemia (e.g. sickle cell disease, thalassemia) 
 Bleeding disorders (e.g. hemophilia, Von Willebrand disease)  

38 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 Malignancies
 Mediastinal masses
i) Common syndromes
 Down syndrome
 Other syndromes (e.g. Pierre Robin sequence, Crouzon syndrome,
Goldenhar syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome) 
j) Preterm infant and neonate
 Tracheoesophageal fistula repair, omphalocele, gastroschisis, congenital
diaphragmatic hernia 
 Bowel obstruction, necrotizing enterocolitis, duodenal atresia, malrotation,
volvulus, imperforate anus 
k) Term infant
 Hernia
 Pyloromyotomy
l) General surgery
 Appendectomy
 Cholecystectomy
 Thoracic surgery and thoracoscopy, including the need for lung isolation
m) Otolaryngology
 Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, including post-tonsillectomy bleed
 Myringotomy, mastoidectomy
 Thyroidectomy typmpanoplasty
 Laryngoscopy for diagnosis and treatment, airway papilloma, epiglottitis
 Bronchoscopy, removal of foreign body from the airway
 Laryngeal/tracheal reconstruction
 Neonatal airway surgery
n) Orthopedic surgery
 Fracture reduction
 Soft tissue surgery
 Club foot repair
 Congenital/acquired (e.g. cerebral palsy)
 Spinal surgery
o) Plastic surgery
 Cleft lip/palate, isolated
 Burn debridement/skin grafting

39 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 Craniofacial reconstruction surgery
p) Neurosurgery
 V–P shunt insertion, revision
 Tumor resection
 Raised ICP
 Myelomeningocele repair
 Neonatal V–P insertion 
q) Urology
 Circumcision, hypospadia
 Ureteric reimplantation
 Cystroscopy, nephrectomy
 Renal transplant vs. bladder exstrophy repair
r) Ophthalmology
 Strabismus
 Cataract
 Laser for retinopathy of prematurity
s) Cardiac procedures
 Pacemaker insertion
 Cardiac catheterization
 PDA ligation
t) Dental surgery
 Dental extraction/restoration
 Orthognathic surgery
u) Remote locations
 Radiology (MRI/CT) and angio-suite
 Cardiac catheterization
 Radiation and chemotherapy
v) Perioperative/PACU issues
 Delirium
 Postextubation stridor
 Pain
 Laryngospasm
 Nausea and vomiting

40 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
w) Regional  
 Perform single shot caudal blocks, ilioinguinal and dorsal penile blocks  
 Neuroaxial technique and ultrasound-guided regional blocks 

2. Communicator  
 
The provision of anesthesia in the pediatric setting is unique as the healthcare provider 
must be able to communicate in an appropriate and age-specific manner with the patient 
and their parents/legal guardians as well as other members of the healthcare team. The 
resident must be able:  
 
a) To apply knowledge of age-specific psychological concerns of pediatric patients 
with respect to anesthesia and surgery and the ability to respond to these 
concerns at an age-appropriate level. 
 
b) To establish a therapeutic relationship with both pediatric patients and parents, 
emphasizing understanding, trust, empathy and confidentiality. 
 
c) To elicit and synthesize relevant information from the patient and family and be 
able to assess and take into account, the impact of the child’s age, gender, ethno 
cultural background, social supports, and emotional influences on illness and 
preoperative clinical course. 
 
d) To discuss appropriate information with the child, family and other healthcare 
provider, surgeons and nursing staff to facilitate the optimal management plan for 
the care of the patient.  This should include discussion of anesthetic procedures, 
options and risk, answering questions and decreasing anxiety.  
 
e) To communicate a succinct assessment and perioperative anesthetic management 
plan to the attending staff.  
 
f) To participate in pediatric anesthesia rounds in order to continue to develop 
formal communication skills involved in a presentation of a topic and response to 
questions from peers.  

3. Collaborator 
 
The successful delivery of perioperative care requires the effective collaboration of the 
anesthetist, surgeon, nurses, other trainees, respiratory technicians, anesthesia adjunct 
personnel and aides. The resident must be able:  

41 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
a) To consult with other physicians and healthcare professionals and demonstrate 
appropriate judgment regarding the assessment of pediatric anesthetic risk.  
 
b) To coordinate the care of pediatric patients with other members of the OR team, 
especially surgeons and nurses as well as staff in the ICU, ward and PACU and in 
offsite locations such as radiology and the cardiac catheterization laboratory.  
 
c) To manage urgent and crisis situations such as hemodynamic or respiratory 
instability and cardiac arrest as a team member or leader. 

4. Manager  
 
a) To demonstrate efficient use of time regarding, patient assessment, OR setup, 
anesthesia induction, transfer to PACU or ICU, and OR turnover. 
 
b) To demonstrate the ability to make judgments regarding the cost-effective use of 
anesthesia resources in drug and equipment options and monitoring. 
 
c) To demonstrate awareness of the principles and priorities for patient scheduling, 
OR lists (elective and emergent) and ICU/PACU/ward care postoperatively. 
 
d) To manage assigned rooms with regards to maintaining the schedule or changing 
the schedule in response to emergencies and additional cases. 
 
e) To manage after hours scheduling of cases, including prioritization and adapting 
to changes. 

5. Scholar  
 
a) To develop and implement a personal continuing education strategy. 
 
b) To demonstrate the ability to critically appraise current anesthesia literature and 
apply new knowledge based on appropriate evidence. 
 
c) To perform effective oral presentation of case reports, journal club, or rounds 
with synthesis of pertinent information. 
 
d) To demonstrate the ability to formulate questions for ongoing appraisal. 
 
e) To effectively teach medical students or other residents. 

42 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

6. Health Advocate 
 
a) To demonstrate knowledge and recognition of broad health and societal issues 
with impact on anesthetic care of the pediatric surgical patient, including severe 
maternal chronic disorders (e.g. maternal malnutrition, hemoglobinopathies), 
child abuse, maternal and adolescent drug/alcohol abuse, and safety promotion 
(e.g. seat belt and helmet use).  
 
b) To demonstrate knowledge of safe anesthesia working practices such as effective 
anesthesia gas scavenging and appropriate handling of narcotics. 

7. Professional 
 
a) To deliver anesthesia care with integrity, honesty and compassion.  
 
b) To demonstrate the attitude, behaviors and ethical standards expected of a 
practitioner of anesthesia. 
 
c) To be aware of the ethical and legal aspects of pediatric patient care.  
 
d) To recognize personal limits through appropriate consultation with staff, other 
physicians and other health professionals and show appropriate respect for those 
consulted. 
 
e) To demonstrate respect for patients by including the patient and family in 
discussions of care management. 
 
f) To recognize potential conflicts in patient care, professional relationships and 
value systems, and to demonstrate the ability to discuss and resolve differences of 
opinion. 
 
g) To be able to accept constructive feedback and criticism and implement 
appropriate advice.  

43 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
INTENSIVE CARE 
Duration: Six months (2 months during junior residency + 4 months during senior 
residency) 
 
The resident will be involved in patient care in a surgical, medical or multi-disciplinary 
intensive care unit depending on the design of the healthcare facility. The resident will be 
supervised by a senior physician and will be involved in the night duty schedule. The resident 
is expected to gain the skills involved in managing critically ill surgical and medical cases.  
 
The resident will be able to understand the principles in basic and advanced work in the 
intensive care, formulate a management plan and understand the dynamics of decision 
making in situation where code status of patient should be decided.  
 
According to the local hospital policy, the resident may be a member of the cardiac arrest 
team and a member of the trauma team.  
 
Objectives: 
  
1. Medical Expert 
 
General objectives: 
 To demonstrate diagnostic and therapeutic skills for ethical and effective 
patient care. 
 To access and apply relevant information to clinical practice. 
 To follow protocols implemented in the unit and adhere to established unit 
standards.  
 
Specific objectives: 
 To elicit, present, and document a history that is relevant, concise, accurate 
and appropriate to the patient’s problem(s). 
 To perform, interpret the findings of, present, and document a physical 
examination that is relevant and appropriate. 
  To select medically appropriate investigative tools, interpret the results of 
common diagnostic tests, and demonstrate an understanding of their cost 
effectiveness, limitations and complications. 
 To formulate a comprehensive patient problem list, synthesize an effective 
diagnostic and therapeutic plan, and establish an appropriate follow-up 
plan. 
 
Specific ICU items: 
 To recognize common rhythm disturbances.  
 To interpret blood gases and assess acid–base status. 

44 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 To provide basic ventilator orders for most patients.
 To classify shock and outline hemodynamic patterns.
 To be aware of the ethical principles appropriate to critically ill patients.
 To be familiar with airway management and indications for intubation.
 To use inotropes and vasopressors appropriately.
 To interpret an electrocardiogram and recognize important life-threatening
findings. 
Specific skills: 
 To apply basic airway management skills (bag/mask ventilation and
uncomplicated intubation). 
 To place central line with appropriate technique (e.g. using US guidance).
 To place arterial line with appropriate technique (e.g. using US guidance)
 To be familiar with indication and interpretation of TEE.
 To understand the principles of ACLS and to apply them in patient
resuscitation. 
2. Communicator
General objectives:  
 To establish a professional relationship with patients and families.
 To obtain and gather relevant history from patients and families.
 To discuss appropriate information with patients and families and other
members of the healthcare team.  
Specific objectives:  
 To demonstrate consideration and compassion in communicating with
patients and families. 
 To provide clear, concise and timely verbal and written communication as
applied to progress notes, sign over of patient care, and discharge planning. 
 To communicate with patients and families regarding informed consent,
medical condition, plan of treatment, prognosis, secondary prevention, 
adverse events, medical uncertainty, medical errors, autopsy, and organ 
donation. 
 To communicate with other healthcare professionals regarding all aspects
of patient care. 
 Specific ICU items: 
 To personally examine and review each of the assigned patients before
morning rounds. 
 To present the history and physical findings of critically ill patients to the
attending physician in an organized and concise manner. 

45 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
 To identify problems in a critically ill patient and generate a problem list. 
 To write daily progress notes on assigned patients. The notes are expected 
to be clear and should identify the relevant daily events and issues for each 
patient. 
 To outline a plan to address the problems identified for each patient.  

3. Collaborator 
 
General objectives: 
 To consult effectively with other physicians and healthcare professionals. 
 To contribute effectively to other interdisciplinary team activities. 
 
Specific objectives: 
 To develop an ability to work effectively and harmoniously with other 
healthcare workers. 
 To identify and describe the role, expertise and limitations of all members 
of an interdisciplinary team required to optimally achieve a goal related to 
patient care, a research problem, an educational task, or an administrative 
responsibility. 
 To effectively participate in interdisciplinary rounds, demonstrating the 
ability to accept, consider and respect the opinions of other team members, 
while contributing personal specialty-specific expertise. 

4. Manager 
 
General objectives: 
 To use personal resources effectively in order to balance patient care,  
 continuing education, and personal activities. 
 To allocate finite healthcare resources wisely. 
 To work effectively and efficiently in a healthcare organization. 
 To use information technology to optimize patient care and lifelong 
learning. 
 
Specific objectives: 
 To use appropriate time management for effective patient care, 
administrative duties, and scholarly activities. 
 To implement patient care practices considering available healthcare 
resources. 
 To complete the tasks discussed on rounds in a timely manner.  
 To seek help appropriately and appreciate personal limitations.  

46 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

5. Health Advocate 
 
General objectives: 
 To identify the important determinants of health. 
 To contribute effectively to improved health of patients and communities. 
 To recognize and respond to those issues where advocacy is appropriate. 
 
Specific objectives: 
 To educate patients and families about and promote the importance of 
long-term healthy behaviors and preventive healthcare (e.g. smoking 
cessation, screening tests, vaccinations, exercise, nutrition). 
 To respect and empower patient autonomy. 
 To promote fair healthcare. 
 To apply the principles of quality improvement and quality assurance. 
 To appreciate the existence of global health advocacy and initiative for 
elimination of disease (tuberculosis, malaria, HIV), and the role of advocacy 
groups and funding agencies. 

6. Scholar 
 
General objectives: 
 To develop, implement, and monitor a personal continuing education 
strategy. 
 To critically appraise sources of medical information. 
 To facilitate learning of patients, students, and other healthcare 
professionals. 
 
Specific objectives: 
 To read around their cases and recognize gaps in knowledge. 
 To be aware of the medical literature available, and to understand how to 
search and critically appraise the medical literature. 
 To demonstrate the ability to teach medical students, residents, patients, 
and other healthcare professionals. 

7. Professional 
 
General objectives: 
 To deliver the highest quality care with integrity, honesty and compassion.  
 To exhibit appropriate personal and interpersonal professional behaviors. 

47 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
 To practice medicine ethically consistent with the obligations of a physician. 
 
Specific objectives: 
 To exhibit appropriate personal and interpersonal professional behaviors. 
This includes keeping attending physicians appraised of relevant events, 
interacting appropriately with the nursing staff, and being available to the 
unit when needed while on call. 
 To recognize, analyze and attempt to resolve in clinical practice ethical 
issues such as truth telling, consent, advanced directives, confidentiality, 
end-of-life care, conflict of interest, resource allocation, research ethics, and 
interactions with the pharmaceutical industry. 
 To recognize and know how to deal with unprofessional behaviors in 
clinical practice, taking into account local and provincial regulations.  
 To evaluate one’s abilities, knowledge and skills, to recognize one’s 
limitations, and to use appropriate strategies to maintain and advance 
professional competence. 
 To know and understand the professional, legal and ethical codes to which 
physicians are bound. 

48 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
CARDIAC ANESTHESIA 
Duration: Three months during senior residency 
The Cardiac Anesthesia rotation is designed to give residents an appreciation of the issues 
involved in the management of anesthesia for cardiac surgery sufficient to participate in the 
perioperative care of these patients.  
The resident is expected to become competent in the management of patients with 
cardiovascular diseases perioperatively during this rotation. It is not intended to produce 
anesthesiologists capable of independently managing anesthesia for cardiac surgery. 
Objectives: 
1. Medical Expert/Clinical Decision Maker
The resident will demonstrate knowledge of the basic sciences as applied to the 
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods of cardiac surgery.  
A. Physiology and Anatomy 
The resident is expected: 
a) To describe the normal coronary anatomy and variants, normal cardiac
physiology, and the effects of disease states on the normal physiology. 
b) To describe the anatomy and physiology of cardiac valves, left ventricle, right
ventricle, atrial, major cardiac vessels, and circulatory system in both normal and 
diseased states.  
c) To describe the normal conduction pathways of the heart and its clinical
significance in disease. 
d) To describe the embryologic circulation, development of the heart, and fetal
physiology as it applies to adult congenital heart disease. 
e) To describe the altered respiratory physiology of the immediately postoperative
ventilated patient with significant surgical incisions and pain (sternotomy, large 
abdominal incision). 
f) Describe common physiological changes occurring in the postoperative period
and the impact these have on end organ function (neurologic, renal, cardiac, 
hepatic, gastro-intestinal).  

49 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
B. Pharmacology  
The resident should know: 
a) Commonly prescribed medications for cardiac surgical patients, the implications
for disease, and the impact on anesthetic management. 
b) Commonly used cardiac anesthetics and dosages.
c) Heparin, antiplatelet agents, and anesthetic implications.
d) Protamine for heparin reversal, along with side effects and complications.
e) Antifibrinolytic agents, mechanisms of action, and indications.
f) The use of blood products (PRBC, FFP, platelets, cryoprecipitate) and blood
alternatives (albumin, starch) as well as transfusion reactions and complications. 
g) Coagulation 
drugs 
(DDAVP, 
activated 
factor 
7a), 
their 
indications,
contraindications, dosages, and complications. 
h) Commonly used vasodilators, vasoconstrictors, inotropic agents, and their
indications, dosages, and side effects. 
i) The appropriate use of pain medications, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
and regional anesthetic techniques in cardiac surgical patients. 
j) Pharmacology of perioperative risk reduction strategies (lipid lowering agents, β-
blockers, aspirin). 
C. Monitoring 
The resident is expected: 
a) To interpret ECG for ischemia, infarction, arrhythmias, and paced rhythms, and to
recognize the limitations and the sensitivity/specificity of ECG as an ischemia 
monitoring tool.  
b) To demonstrate the principles of noninvasive and invasive blood pressure
monitoring and its pitfalls. 
c) To acquire skills of arterial and central venous cannulation (with ultrasound),
peripheral venous cannulation, and pulmonary artery catheterization. 

50 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

d) To interpret CVP and data from PA catheter (PAP, PCWP, Cardiac output) and 
know it indications, complications, and management. 
 
e) To understand the basics of introductory TEE, including techniques of probe 
insertion and several basic views, and its implication and application to the 
critically ill patient.  
 
f) To understand laboratory monitoring of the coagulation system (PTT, INR, 
fibrinogen) as applied to the cardiac patient.  
 
g) To assess the adequacy of mechanical ventilation using clinical parameters and 
laboratory arterial blood gas analysis.  
 
h) To recognize the parameters used to assess intraoperative blood loss and options 
to treat blood loss including medical and surgical alternatives.  
 
i) To know the significance of temperature management in the intraoperative 
period, including hypothermic techniques and the importance of normothermia 
during beating heart procedures.  
 
j) To understand the indicators of volume status, especially when weaning from 
bypass, and including the findings from invasive monitors, TEE, and clinical 
indicators (urine volume).  
 
i) To use appropriate intraoperative blood work for the management of patient 
care, and be aware of new monitoring devices (noninvasive CO, BIS) and their 
potential applications during cardiac surgery.  
 
D. Clinical Assessment & Management  
The resident is expected:  
 
a) To complete a detailed history, physical exam, order appropriate laboratory and 
ancillary investigations, and provide a management plan for a cardiac surgical 
patient. 
  
b) To know current indications and recommendations for SBE prophylaxis.  
c) To manage medical bleeding. 
  
d) To correct common derangements in metabolic and electrolyte disturbances in 
the intraoperative period. 

51 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
e) To know the basic principles of cardiac support devices including IABP and
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. 
f) To know the common pathophysiology and management of patients with
complications of: 
 Coronary artery disease, acute myocardial ischemia and infarction,
complications of myocardial infarction and thrombolytic therapy 
 Valvular heart disease and valve replacement or repair
 Aortic dissection, thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm
 Shock and the use of volume resuscitation, venodilators/constrictors,
inotropes, and lusitropes 
 Emergencies requiring ACLS
 Cardiac tamponade, constrictive pericarditis
 Dilated, restrictive and obstructive cardiomyopathy, CHF, and diastolic
dysfunction 
 Aberrant conduction, dysrhythmia, sudden acute and subacute ventricular
and supra-ventricular arrhythmia 
 Pacemakers and the indications for and applications of the various modes
of temporary pacing 
 Pneumohemothorax
 Pulmonary edema, pneumonia, CHF
 COPD, asthma, sleep apnea in the ventilated patient
 Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and heparin resistance
 Neurologic risk stratification during CPB procedures
 Renal failure and its management
 Diabetes and endocrine control, and the implications of hyperglycemia
2. Communicator
a) To demonstrate effective communication with patients and families (description of
procedures, informed consent, anesthetic options and risks). 
b) To demonstrate effective communication with OR team (cardiac surgeons, nurses,
perfusionists) and postoperative team, particularly during the initiation conduct and 
removal of cardiopulmonary bypass.  
c) To provide clear and concise written consultation and anesthetic records.
3. Collaborator

52 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

a) To recognize the need to utilize other specialists for the care and management of the 
critical patient.  
 
b) To foster healthy team relationships.  

4. Manager  
 
a) To manage OR time by efficiently conducting the anesthetic, continuing education, 
and personal activities.  
 
b) To make effective use of healthcare resources.  

5. Health Advocate 
 
a) To demonstrate the use of risk reduction strategies, including use of ultrasound and 
sterile technique for invasive lines.  

6. Scholar  
 
a) To demonstrate commitment to continuing personal education including use of 
information technology.  
 
b) To be able to critically review cardiac anesthesia literature and to describe the 
principles of research relevant to this population.  
 
c) To assist in education of other members of the OR team.  

7. Professional  
 
a) To always demonstrate respectful and compassionate behavior toward patients, their 
families, and other healthcare providers.  
 
b) To demonstrate an appropriate sense of responsibility to themselves and their 
patients.  
 
c) To remain calm and organized in stressful or emergency situations.  
 
d) To demonstrate appropriate interactions with colleagues and staff.  

53 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
REGIONAL ANESTHESIA 
Duration: 1–2 months 
The aim of this rotation is to provide the resident with an extended exposure for the 
attainment of a higher level of competence in various regional anesthesia techniques. This 
rotation is intended to gain procedural mastery under the supervision of qualified regional 
anesthesiologists. 
1. Medical Expert/Clinical Decision Maker
The resident should demonstrate the understanding of anatomy, physiology, and 
pharmacology. The resident should demonstrate knowledge acquisition in the following 
areas:  
a) Anatomy related to specific regional anesthesia technique including surface
landmarks, perineural structure, ultra sound anatomy, sensory innervation, motor 
innervation, and components and details of brachial plexus, lumbar plexus, and sacral 
plexus.  
b) Physiology related to specific regional anesthesia techniques and disease processes,
including nerve transmission/blockade, physiologic response to acute pain, and the 
patient with chronic pain at the site of surgery.  
c) Pharmacology of local anesthetics, adjuvants (e.g. epinephrine, opioids, HCO3),
chronic opioid use in the patient presenting for surgery. 
d) Regional anesthesia equipment including needles, peripheral nerve stimulator,
ultrasound, catheters, and stimulating catheters. 
e) Complications/side effects, including: IV toxicity and management of local anesthetic
overdose, neural injury, needle trauma to surrounding tissue (i.e. hematoma, 
pneumothorax, dural puncture), unintended neural blockade (i.e. phrenic nerve, 
epidural).  
f) Contraindications related to specific regional anesthesia techniques including
infection, anticoagulation, pre-existing neural injury, increased ICP, and pulmonary 
disease.  
g) To perform/assist the following procedures:
o IV regional
o Spinal anesthesia

54 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
o Epidural anesthesia/analgesia 
 Thoracic 
 Lumbar  
 Caudal 
o Cervical plexus block 
o Brachial plexus block 
o Interscalene 
 Supraclavicular 
 Axillary 
 Infracalvicular block 
o Intercostal, intrapleural block 
o Paravertebral block, thoracic and lumbar 
o Lower limb blocks 
 Femoral 
 Sciatic 
 Obturator 
 Lateral femoral cutaneous 
 Ankle block 
 
The resident must be aware of the need to provide preoperative (ability to identify by 
history, physical examination and lab data the appropriateness of conduction anesthesia) 
and postoperative care in an objective manner. The resident will actively seek access to 
surgical procedures appropriate for conduction anesthesia. Assistance from the assigned 
anesthesiologist or a resource person should be obtained. 
 
The minimal learning objectives include: 
 
a) Anatomy 
 Anatomy for different blocks. 
 
b) Physiology 
 Nerve conduction (structural classification of nerve type and relevance to 
local anesthetics action, generation of action potential, refractory period 
and recovery). 
 Neuroaxial block (differences and similarities between spinal and epidural  
blockade with respect to mechanism of action, effects of adjuvants and 
cardiorespiratory physiology, effects on cardiorespiratory system, effects 
on coagulation, neurohormonal stress response, effects on intraoperative 
blood loss, effects on postoperative respiratory). 
 Neuroendocrine stress response (systems affected by the stress response). 
 
c) Pharmacology 

55 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 Mechanism of action of local anesthetics.
 Structure–activity relationship (e.g. describe the difference between amide
and ester LA and understand the physiochemical properties of potency, 
protein binding, pKa and pH). 
 Kinetics (e.g. describe drug, patient and technical factors contributing to
accelerate recovery from local anesthetics as well as describe the 
determinants of serum LA concentration, its measurement and the role of 
protein binding). 
 Adjuvants e.g epinephrine, bicarbonate, opioids and NMDA antagonists.
List clinical indications, advantages and disadvantages of inclusion of 
adjuvants in spinal, epidural, regional and local infiltration. 
d) Technology
To demonstrate an understanding of the technology available for identification of 
nerves for performance of plexus blocks and peripheral nerve blocks as well as 
epidural space detections. 
 Nerve stimulation
o To describe the rationale of nerve stimulation.
o To describe the advantages, disadvantages and limitations of nerve
stimulators. 
o To know different types of needles (insulated vs. noninsulated).
o To demonstrate how to use a nerve stimulator.
 Ultrasound
o To describe the basic physic principles of ultrasound and their clinical
relevance in locating different anatomical structures. 
o To describe the advantages, disadvantages and limitations of ultrasound in
locating nerves. 
o To select appropriate ultrasound probe and machine settings to properly
identify the desired structures. 
o To know different types of techniques (in-plane vs. out-of-plane).
e) Clinical Application
To demonstrate an ability to perform the following specific objectives for all regional 
anesthetic techniques. 
 Anesthetic planning
o To elaborate an anesthetic plan including appropriate options, contingency
plans and expansions. 
o To select regional anesthetic techniques for anesthetic care.
o To discuss the advantages, disadvantages and physiological implications of
regional anesthesia with patients. 

56 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
o To discuss regional anesthesia + GA vs. GA vs. regional anesthesia.
o To know regional techniques in pediatrics.
 Nerve localization
o To describe anatomic landmarks for performance of blocks.
o To use a nerve stimulator or ultrasound for identification of plexuses and
peripheral nerves. 
f) Contraindications and complications
o To know relative and absolute contraindications.
o To describe guidelines for regional anesthesia for patient taking anticoagulant
drugs, and to interact with surgeon and administrators to create policies 
governing the interaction of anticoagulant therapy and anesthetic/analgesic 
management. 
o To be aware of the complications of regional anesthesia.
o To describe the complications of regional anesthesia and the risk factors,
presentation, diagnosis and treatment of:  
 Failed block
 Intravascular injection of LA
 Systemic toxicity
 Total spinal
 Over dosage
 Epidural hematoma and abscess
 PDPH
 Hypotension
g) Spectrum of Anesthesia
The resident should demonstrate an understanding of the spectrum of regional 
anesthetic techniques and the ability to perform those relevant to his/her level of 
training. The resident must be able to describe site-specific equipment, 
contraindications and to select drugs for each block.  
The resident must demonstrate competency and cognitive knowledge by oral and/or 
written examination on the following topics: 
o IV regional
o Spinal anesthesia
o Epidural anesthesia/analgesia
 Thoracic
 Lumbar
 Caudal
o Cervical plexus block
o Brachial plexus block
o Interscalene

57 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
 Supraclavicular 
 Axillary 
 Infracalvicular block 
o Intercostal, intrapleural block 
o Paravertebral block, thoracic  and lumbar 
o Lower limb blocks 
 Femoral 
 Sciatic 
 Obturator 
 Lateral femoral cutaneous 
 Ankle block 

2. Communicator  
 
a) To demonstrate effective communication skills in dealing with the patient’s 
problems.  
 
b) To demonstrate respect and compassion, be able to communicate that the patient’s 
problems have been understood,  and describe options, side effects and 
complications of various anesthetic options in a manner such that the patient can 
make an informed decision regarding choice of anesthesia.  
 
c) To accurately provide information to families on patient condition and treatment 
prognosis. 
 
d) To make decisions when the family must be relied upon for substitute decision-
making when the patient is incapable of deciding for himself or herself.  

3. Collaborator 
 
a) To demonstrate a professional attitude and competent manner when acting as a 
consultant as well as be able to consult other disciplines when appropriate. 
 
b) To involve the attending anesthesiologist in the room and the surgeon in all decisions 
pertaining to a patient’s postoperative analgesia management plans. 

4. Manager  
 
a) To demonstrate responsibility in providing consultations and interventions in a 
timely manner.  

58 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
b) To be aware of the monitoring requirements of various regional techniques
according to the standard guidelines 
c) To be aware of the cost of various treatment modalities and the necessity of
allocating resources appropriately. 
d) To be aware of the value of quality assurance, and morbidity and mortality review.
5. Health Advocate
The resident should demonstrate an ability to provide appropriate information to the 
patients and/or their family so they can make an informed decision (and obtain consent) 
regarding regional anesthesia as:  
 A primary anesthetic technique.
 A component of intra- and postoperative analgesia.
 Dealing with adverse outcomes.
6. Scholar
To critically evaluate and understand outcome studies related to the influence of 
regional anesthesia on outcome postoperatively. 
7. Professional
a) To demonstrate appropriate behaviors and attitude towards patients, their families,
and all healthcare providers (i.e. the anesthesiology team, the surgical team, the 
nursing staff).  
b) To respond to calls from the PACU when they are needed for acute pain issues.
c) To provide appropriate handover to residents on-call at the end of the day.

59 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
PAIN MEDICINE 
Although perioperative pain management is a daily task for any anesthesiologist, the 
resident will devote time to pain management, being acute or chronic, nociceptive or 
neuropathic, in inpatient or outpatient settings. 
 
At the completion of training, the resident will have acquired the following competencies 
and will function effectively as:  
 
1. Medical Expert/Clinical Decision Maker 
  
 General objectives:  
  
a) To demonstrate knowledge of anatomy and physiology of pain pathways in the 
peripheral and central nervous system. 
  
b) To understand the role of psychological factors, particularly anxiety and depression, 
on pain perception and disability.  
 
c) To obtain a complete pain history and perform a relevant physical examination.  
 
d) To formulate a differential diagnosis and treatment plan, which incorporates 
pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic modalities of treatment. 
  
e)  To demonstrate knowledge of specific diagnostic/treatment modalities (indications, 
contraindications, complications, and techniques).  
 
f) To demonstrate knowledge of chronic pain medication (opioids, antiinflammatory 
drugs, anticonvulsants, antidepressants).  
 
g) To be aware of national practice guidelines for chronic pain management, especially  
in relation to controlled medications.  
 
h) To demonstrate knowledge of basic interventional techniques commonly employed 
in chronic pain medicine including: peripheral nerve blocks, sympathetic blockade 
for upper & lower extremity, trigger point injections, epidural steroid injections, 
blocks for diagnosis and treatment of the facet joint syndrome, and sacroiliac joint 
injections.  
 
i) To be aware of effective use of consultation services in chronic pain management. 
 
j)  To demonstrate knowledge of basic legal, social, and bioethical issues encountered in 
chronic pain management, including informed consent.  

60 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

Specific objectives: 
 
Acute pain management: 
  
a) To describe the physiologic changes producing and induced by perioperative pain.  
 
b) To assess pain in the perioperative period.  
 
c) To describe the options available for perioperative analgesia, their advantages and 
disadvantages, and select appropriate therapies for each individual patient.  
 
d) To 
use 
a 
multimodal 
approach 
by 
utilizing 
both 
pharmacological 
and 
nonpharmacological modalities. 
 
Chronic pain management:  
  
The resident should be able to apply knowledge gained in the treatment of the following 
specific pain disorders: 
 Complex regional pain syndrome 
 Neuropathic pain syndromes (i.e. peripheral diabetic neuropathy, 
postherpetic neuralgia) 
 Central pain syndromes 
 Intractable anginal pain 
 Visceral pain 
 Pelvic pain 
 Headaches 
 Pain related to peripheral vascular insufficiency 
 Role of personality disorders, anxiety states, depression, compensation and 
disability 

2. Communicator  
 
a) To establish a professional relationship with patients and families.  
 
b) To obtain and collate relevant history from patients and families.  
 
c) To listen effectively.  
d) To demonstrate appropriate oral and written communication skills in inpatient, 
outpatient, and OR environments. 

61 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

e) To inform the patient of the options available, the associated risks and benefits, as 
well as the expectations and progress in a manner that is understandable to the 
patient. 

 3. Collaborator  
 
a) To consult effectively with other physicians and healthcare professionals.  
 
b) To demonstrate an understanding of the respective abilities of all team members.  
 
c) To be able to be team player.  

 4. Manager  
 
a) To demonstrate basic knowledge of the management of an ambulatory care pain 
clinic.  
 
b) To use information technology to optimize patient care and lifelong learning.  
 
c) To demonstrate knowledge of quality assurance to outcomes in a chronic pain clinic.  
 
d) To demonstrate effective time management skills. 
 
e) To demonstrate understanding of: 
 The structure of the pain service, and how it fits in the administrative 
structure of the institution.  
 The advantages and disadvantages of alternative models.  
 The costs incurred by pain management strategies. 

 5. Health Advocate  
 
a) To identify the important determinants of health affecting pain patients.  
 
b) To recognize opportunities for anesthesiologists to advocate for resources for pain 
management.  
 
c) To educate both patients, and families about their pain conditions, as well as other 
members of the healthcare team.  

62 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 

6. Scholar  
 
a) To critically appraise sources of information in the pain management literature.  
 
b) To be able to judge whether a research project is properly designed using critical 
appraisal methods.  

7. Professional  
 
a) To deliver the highest quality of care with integrity, honesty, and compassion. 
 
b)  To exhibit appropriate personal and interpersonal professional behaviors. 
 
c) To practice medicine ethically, consistent with the obligations of a physician. 
 
d) To include the patient in discussions concerning appropriate diagnostic and 
management procedures. 
 
e) To respect the opinions of fellow consultants and referring physicians in the 
management of patient problems and be willing to provide means whereby 
differences of opinion can be discussed and resolved. 
 
f) To establish a pattern of continuing development of personal clinical skills and 
knowledge through medical education. 
 
g) To recognize and have an approach to ethical and psychosocial issues in pain 
medicine.  

63 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
VASCULAR ANESTHESIA 
Objectives: 
 
To allow the resident to acquire particular intellectual skills necessary to care for high-risk 
vascular patients. 
 
1. Medical Expert/Clinical Decision Maker 
 
a) To demonstrate knowledge of general internal medicine, anatomy, physiology 
and pharmacology with particular reference to the cardiovascular, respiratory, 
hepatic, renal and coagulation systems, blood transfusion, acid–base, fluid and 
electrolyte balance. 
 
b) To demonstrate knowledge of the principles and practice of anesthesia as they 
apply to patient support during vascular surgery.  
 
c) To demonstrate competence in BLS, ACLS and ATLS. 
 
d) To demonstrate knowledge and competence in the anatomy, physiology, and 
pathophysiology of the peripheral circulation. 
 
e) To know the epidemiologic, medical, and surgical aspects of vascular disease 
(pathophysiology of atherosclerosis, natural history of patients with peripheral 
vascular disease, medical therapy of atherosclerosis). 
 
f) To perform the preoperative evaluation and preparation of the vascular patient: 
 Clinical predictors of increased perioperative CVS risk, type of surgery, 
ACC/AHA guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation care of 
patients undergoing noncardiac surgery, assess and optimize coexisting 
disease (coronary artery disease, heart failure, cardiac valvular disease, 
diabetes mellitus, COPD and tobacco abuse, renal failure, cerebrovascular 
disease), coronary revascularization before noncardiac surgery risks vs. 
benefits, PTCA and stenting before noncardiac surgery Implications and 
optimal timing of noncardiac surgery after PTCA and stenting.  
 
g) To know the pharmacological agents used in vascular patients (nitrates, -
adrenergic receptor antagonists, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor 
antagonists, digoxin, loop and thiazide diuretics, spironolactone, calcium channel 
blockers, clonidine, hydralazine, insulin and oral hypoglycemic, cholesterol 
lowering agents, epinephrine and norepinephrine, dopamine and dobutamine, 
milrinone, vasopressin, heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin, anticoagulants). 

64 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
h) To know the etiology and prevention of perioperative myocardial ischemia:
 Perioperative stress response and risk of myocardial ischemia
 Perioperative medical management of coronary artery disease: nitrates,
adrenergic blockade (2-agonists, calcium channel blockers, statins, ACE 
inhibitors) 
i) To understand perioperative renal protection (cardiac performance and
perfusion pressure, fluid management, mannitol, N-acetylcysteine, fenoldopam). 
j) To consider hematologic parameters in vascular surgery (normal hemostasis,
laboratory evaluation, congenital bleeding disorders, acquired bleeding 
disorders, platelet defects, hypercoagulable states and venous thrombosis), 
antithrombin III deficiency, protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency, defects in 
fibrinolysis, venous thrombosis, anticoagulant therapy, heparin, LMWH and 
heparinoids, Coumadin, platelet inhibitors, herbal therapy, thrombolytic therapy, 
pentoxifylline 
(procoagulant 
therapy), 
tranexamic 
acid, 
desmopressin 
(intraoperative blood loss and replacement, postoperative bleeding and 
reoperation). 
k) To perform monitoring during vascular anesthesia electrocardiography
arrhythmias, conduction defects, myocardial ischemia (three electrode system, 
modified three electrode system, five electrode system, pulse oximetry, 
capnometry, noninvasive blood pressure monitoring, body temperature, invasive 
hemodynamic monitoring. 
l) To understand the advantages, indications, contraindications and complications
of the following: arterial pressure monitoring, CVP monitoring, pulmonary artery 
catheterization, cardiac output, TEE. 
m) 
To understand abdominal aortic reconstruction etiology, epidemiology and
pathophysiology of AAA and aortoiliac occlusive disease, natural history and 
surgical mortality, pathophysiology of aortic occlusion and reperfusion 
(cardiovascular changes, renal hemodynamics and renal protection, humoral and 
coagulation profile, visceral and mesenteric ischemia, central nervous system 
and spinal cord ischemia and protection). 
n) To demonstrate knowledge in the following topics:
Clamp level: infrarenal, suprarenal, supraceliac 
• Anesthetic management: autologous blood transfusion, anesthetic drugs
and techniques, thoracic epidural 
• Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery etiology and preoperative
preparation and monitoring 
• Classification of TAAA’s

65 
SAUDI BOARD ANESTHESIA CURRICULUM 
 
• Morbidity and mortality  
• Neurologic complications: anatomy and blood supply of spinal cord, artery 
of Adamkiewicz, cerebrovascular accidents, spinal cord infarction, 
paraplegia, Crawford’s classification of TAAA’s and incidence of paraplegia 
• Spinal cord protection 
• Renal ischemia and protection 
• Coagulation and metabolic management 
• One lung ventilation  
• Anesthetic management  
 
Endovascular aortic repair 
• Stents: graft devices and approval 
• Patient selection 
• Preoperative diagnostic imaging of aneurysm, surrounding anatomy and 
device sizing  
• Endovascular technique for EVAR and TEVAR  
• Anesthetic management: regional vs. GA  
• Indications for CSF drainage in TEVAR  
• Complications (damage to access vessels, endoleaks, graft migration, renal 
ischemia, paraplegia, stroke, aortoesophageal fistula, conversion to open)  
• Patient outcomes: open vs. endovascular  
 
o) To demonstrate knowledge in lower extremity revascularization epidemiology 
and natural history of peripheral vascular disease, pathophysiology of 
atherosclerosis, medical therapy for atherosclerosis and complications of medical 
therapy, chronic medical problems and risk prediction in peripheral vascular 
disease patients, acute arterial occlusion, chroni