Document: 58. __Pediatric Hematology and Oncology fellowship__.pdf
Extraction Method: Improved CanMEDS Without Levels (layout-aware)
Pages Extracted: 14-17
Candidates Found: 34
Validation: Valid CanMEDS without levels (score: 173/268, 3/7 roles)
================================================================================

--- Page 14 ---
CanMEDS competencies relevant to Pediatric Hematology/Oncology.
• Identify and appropriately respond to relevant ethical issues arising in patient care and
medical decision-making.
• Demonstrate the ability to prioritize professional duties when faced with multiple patients and
problems.
• Demonstrate compassionate and patient-centred care.
• Recognize and respond to the ethical dimensions in medical decision-making .
• Demonstrate medical expertise in situations other than patient care, such as providing expert
legal testimony or advising governments, as needed.
2) Establish and maintain clinical knowledge, skills and attitudes appropriate to Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology
• Apply knowledge of the clinical, socio-behavioural, and fundamental biomedical sciences
relevant to Pediatric Hematology/Oncology. This includes the knowledge needed to effectively
and ethically provide medical care for infants, children and adolescents with cancer and non-
malignant hematologic disorders.
o Foundational knowledge of the following:
 Physiological changes in growth and development as they relate to cancer and non-
malignant hematological disorders in pediatric patients, including but not limited to
normal values and the maturation of hematopoietic organs and tissues.
 Pathophysiological processes as they relate to cancer and nonmalignant
hematological disorders.
 Psychological processes in pediatric patients with cancer and nonmalignant
hematological disorders.
 Cellular and molecular biology, biochemistry, pharmacology and immunology as they
relate to the understanding of cancer and non-malignant hematologic disorders.
 General principles of anatomical pathology as they relate to Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology.
 Disorders of immune function as related to Pediatric Hematology/Oncology.
o Expert knowledge in hematopathology and laboratory medicine as it relates to Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology. This includes but is not limited to knowledge of the appropriate
indications for, methods of, and limitations of the following:
 Peripheral blood morphology
 Bone marrow aspirations and biopsies
 Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) assessment
 Hemostasis and thrombosis evaluation
 Transfusion medicine
 Flow cytometry, including but not limited to immunophenotyping
 Hemoglobinopathy investigations
 Cytogenetics and molecular diagnostics
o Foundational knowledge of general principles of diagnostic imaging as they apply to
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology.
o Expert knowledge of pediatric cancer, including but not limited to the following:
 Diagnostic work-up for patient with a potential underlying malignancy
 Diagnosis and management of pediatric malignancies, including but not limited to:
 Leukemias and preleukemic disorders
 Lymphomas
10 SAUDI BOARD PEDIATRIC HEMATOLOGY AND ONCOLOGY

--- Page 15 ---
SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 Central nervous system (CNS) tumors
 Retinoblastoma
 Wilms tumor
 Neuroblastoma
 Hepatoblastoma
 Ewing sarcoma
 Osteogenic sarcoma
 Rhabdomyosarcoma
 Common pediatric oncologic emergencies, including but not limited to:
 Fever and neutropenia
 Tumor lysis syndrome
 Superior mediastinal syndrome
 Hyperleukocytosis
 Spinal cord compression
 Cancer chemotherapy as it applies to pediatric oncology patients, including but not
limited to mechanisms of action and toxicities related to specific chemotherapy
agents
 The role, indications, and complications of surgery as applied to the management of
infants, children and adolescents with cancer
 The role, indications, and complications of radiation therapy as applied to the
management of infants, children and adolescents with cancer
 The potential genetic implications for patients and families with inherited cancer
predispositions, and the importance of genetic counseling
o Expert knowledge of non-malignant hematologic diseases, including but not limited to:
 Diagnosis and management of pediatric hematological diseases, including but not
limited to:
 Disorders of hematopoiesis
─ Aplastic anemia
─ Red cell aplasia and polycythemia
─ Leukopenia and leukocytosis
─ Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and thrombocytosis
 Red cell disorders
─ Hemoglobinopathies
─ Red cell membrane defects
─ Red cell enzyme deficiencies
─ Nutritional anemias
─ Iron deficiency
─ Megaloblastic anemia
─ Dyserythropoiesis
─ Immune hemolytic anemia
 White cell disorders
─ Lymphopenia and lymphocytosis
─ Neutropenia and neutrophilia
─ Eosinophilia
─ Neutrophil function defects
─ Storage diseases
 Disorders of hemostasis and thrombosis
─ Thrombocytopenia and thrombocytosis
─ Platelet dysfunction
─ Congenital coagulation disorders
SAUDI BOARD PEDIATRIC HEMATOLOGY AND ONCOLOGY 11

--- Page 16 ---
SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES
─ Acquired coagulation disorders
─ Hypercoagulable states
─ Disorders of fibrinolysis
 Perinatal and developmental hematology
─ Anemia
─ Neutropenia
─ Thrombocytopenia
─ Bleeding diatheses
─ Leukocytosis
 Splenomegaly and disorders of splenic function
 Lymphadenopathy
 Histiocytic disorders
─ Langerhans cell histiocytosis
─ Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
 Potential genetic implications for patients and families with inherited hematological
conditions, and the importance of genetic counseling
o Expert knowledge of stem cell transplantation as it applies to Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, including but not limited to:
 Basic biology of hematopoiesis and hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), and
the immunologic relationships between donor hematopoietic cells and the host.
 Indications for autologous and allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
 Basics of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system and the principles involved in
choosing matched and unmatched stem cell donors.
 Different sources of available stem cells, specifically bone marrow, peripheral blood
and cord blood, including methods of cryopreservation.
 Choice and implementation of preparative regimens used in HSCT, including but not
limited to the use of radiation therapy.
 Pathogenesis of graft versus host disease (GVHD)
 Strategies to prevent, diagnose and manage potential complications of HSCT,
including but not limited to sinusoidal obstructive syndrome (SOS), engraftment
syndrome, graft rejection and GVHD
o Expert knowledge of supportive care related to the management of Pediatric
Hematology/ Oncology patients.
 Prevention and treatment of infectious complications
 Prevention and treatment of chemotherapy-related organ dysfunction
 Management of pain
 Management of mucositis
 Nutritional support
 Management of constipation
 Anti-emetic therapy
 Blood product support
 Care and use of central venous access devices
 Psychosocial support
o Expert knowledge of long-term follow-up of patients with Pediatric Hematology/Oncology
problems for the purposes of:
 Disease monitoring
 Detecting late effects of therapy, recognizing the particular risks and needs of infants,
children and adolescents
 Promotion and maintenance of a healthy lifestyle
12 SAUDI BOARD PEDIATRIC HEMATOLOGY AND ONCOLOGY

--- Page 17 ---
SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES
o Palliative care and pain/symptom management as applied to Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology.
 Recognition and assessment of patients in need of pain and symptom management,
including use of appropriate pain scales.
 Appropriate use of medications and other therapies to provide complex symptom
relief for infants, children and adolescents.
 Recognition and assessment of chronic pain as relevant to Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, including but not limited to sickle cell pain, hemarthroses and
cancer related pain.
 Community and hospital resources necessary to provide appropriate palliative care
services.
 Recognition of the psychosocial needs of the patient and family in the context of
palliative care and complex pain management.
• Describe the CanMEDS framework of competencies relevant to Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology.
• Apply lifelong learning skills of the Scholar Role to implement a personal program to keep up-
to-date, and enhance areas of professional competence.
• Contribute to the enhancement of quality care and patient safety in Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, integrating the available best evidence and best practices.
3) Perform a complete and appropriate assessment of a patient
• Identify and explore issues to be addressed in a patient encounter effectively, including the
patient’s context and preferences.
• Elicit a history that is relevant, concise, and accurate to context and preferences, for the
purposes of prevention and health promotion, diagnosis and/or management.
• Perform an efficient physical examination, demonstrating sensitivity to the patient’s needs
and modifications necessary based on the patient's age, gender, sexual orientation, and
ethnicity.
• Select medically appropriate investigative methods in a resource-effective and ethical manner.
• Demonstrate effective clinical problem solving and judgment to address patient problems,
including interpreting available data and integrating information to generate differential
diagnoses and management plans.
o Pediatric cancer.
 Plan and coordinate an appropriate diagnostic work-up for any new patient with a
potential underlying malignancy.
 Diagnose and manage pediatric malignancies, including but not limited to:
 Leukemias and preleukemic disorders
 Lymphomas
 CNS tumors
 Retinoblastoma
 Wilms tumor
 Neuroblastoma
 Hepatoblastoma
 Ewing sarcoma
 Osteogenic sarcoma
 Rhabdomyosarcoma
 Manage a wide variety of pediatric cancer patients receiving medical care, including
but not limited to those who are receiving chemotherapy, those who are
experiencing toxicities related to treatment, and those who are acutely ill.
 Manage pediatric oncologic emergencies, including but not limited to:
SAUDI BOARD PEDIATRIC HEMATOLOGY AND ONCOLOGY 13
