Document: 89. __Pediatric Allergy And Immunology__.pdf
Extraction Method: Improved CanMEDS Without Levels (layout-aware)
Pages Extracted: 21-26
Candidates Found: 24
Validation: Valid CanMEDS without levels (score: 233/268, 6/7 roles)
================================================================================

--- Page 21 ---
OUTCOMES AND COMPETENCIES
2.2. Apply lifelong learning skills of the scholar role to keep up-to-date and enhance areas
of professional competence
2.3. Contribute to the enhancement of quality care and patient safety in clinical immunology
and allergy, integrating the best available evidence and practice
3. Perform a complete and appropriate assessment of a clinical immunology and allergy patient
3.1. Identify and explore issues to be addressed in a patient encounter effectively, including
patients’ context and preferences
3.2. Conduct a history that is relevant, concise, clear, and accurate to context and
preferences (including, but not limited to, potential allergic and non-allergic triggers and
environmental/workplace history)
3.3. Perform a relevant and accurate focused physical examination for the purposes of
prevention and health promotion, diagnosis and/or management
3.4. Select medically appropriate investigative methods in a resource-effective and ethical
manner
3.5. Demonstrate effective clinical problem-solving skills including appropriate interpretation
of available data.
4. Use preventive and therapeutic interventions effectively
4.1. Implement a management plan in collaboration with patient and their families
4.2. Develop an appropriate plan for investigation and management of a child or adult with
an allergic, autoimmune, and immunodeficiency disease.
4.3. Demonstrate appropriate and timely application of preventive and therapeutic
interventions relevant to clinical immunology and allergy
4.3.1. Environmental control of the home and workplace
4.3.2. Disease specific action plan (including, but not limited, to asthma and anaphylaxis)
4.3.3. Education regarding the appropriate use of allergic disease specific devices
(including, but not limited, to auto injectors and inhalers)
4.3.4. Immunomodulatory therapy (including anti IgE)
4.3.5. Immunoglobulin replacement therapy
4.4. Demonstrate how appropriate informed consent is obtained for therapies
5. Demonstrate proficient and appropriate use of procedural skills, both diagnostic and
therapeutic
5.1. Demonstrate effective, appropriate, and timely performance of diagnostic procedures
relevant to clinical immunology and allergy, including the following:
5.1.1. Epicutaneous and intradermal allergy tests
5.1.2. Patch testing
5.1.3. Allergen immunotherapy
5.1.4. Food challenge
5.1.5. Medication challenge/desensitization
5.1.6. Inhalant immunotherapy
5.1.7. Venom immunotherapy
5.2. Obtain appropriate informed consent for procedures where applicable
5.3. Document and disseminate information related to procedures performed and their
outcomes
5.4. Arrange adequate follow-up where appropriate for procedures performed
6. Recognize the limits of their own expertise and seek appropriate consultation from other
health professionals
6.1. Demonstrate effective, appropriate, and timely consultation of another health
professional as needed for optimal patient care
6.2. Arrange appropriate follow-up care services for a patient and their family
PEDIATRIC ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY 17

--- Page 22 ---
OUTCOMES AND COMPETENCIES
Communicator
Definition: As communicators, clinical immunologists and allergists effectively facilitate the
doctor-patient relationship and the dynamic exchanges that occur before, during, and after the
medical encounter.
Key and enabling competencies: clinical immunologists and allergists can…
1. Develop rapport, trust, and ethical therapeutic relationships with patients and families
1.1. Recognize that being an effective communicator is a core clinical skill for physicians,
and that effective physician-patient communication can foster patient and physician
satisfaction, adherence and improved clinical outcomes
1.2. Establish positive therapeutic relationships with patients and their families that are
characterized by understanding, trust, respect, honesty, and empathy
1.3. Respect patient confidentiality, privacy, and autonomy
1.4. Listen effectively
1.5. Be aware of and respond appropriately to nonverbal cues
1.6. Facilitate an effective structured clinical encounter
2. Accurately elicit and synthesize relevant information and perspectives of patients and
families, colleagues, and other professionals
2.1. Gather information about a disease and about a patient’s beliefs, concerns,
expectations and illness experience
2.2. Seek out and synthesize relevant information from other sources where appropriate,
such as a patient’s family, caregivers and other professionals
3. Convey relevant information and explanations accurately to patients and families, colleagues,
and other professionals
3.1. Deliver information to a patient and family, colleagues, and other professionals in a
humane manner and in such a way that it is understandable, encourages discussion and
participation in decision-making
4. Develop a common understanding on issues, problems and plans with patients, families, and
other professionals to develop a shared plan of care
4.1. Identify and explore problems to be addressed from a patient encounter effectively,
including the patient’s context, responses, concerns, and preferences
4.2. Respect diversity and difference, including but not limited to the impact of sex, religion,
age, culture, and ethnicity on decision-making
4.2.1. Give appropriate advice (including but not limited to allergen avoidance and
pharmacologic/immunologic treatment), which includes consideration of patients’ sex,
religion, age, culture, and ethnicity
4.3. Encourage discussion, questions, and interaction in the encounter
4.4. Engage patients, families, and relevant health professionals in shared decision making
to develop a plan of care
4.5. Address challenging communication issues effectively, such as obtaining informed
consent, delivering bad news, and addressing anger, confusion, and misunderstanding
4.5.1. Demonstrate skills in working with others who present significant communication
challenges such as anger or confusion, or an ethno-cultural background different from
the physician’s own
5. Convey effective oral and written information about a medical encounter
5.1. Maintain clear, accurate, and appropriate records (written or electronic) of clinical
encounters and plans
5.2. Present verbal reports of clinical encounters and plans
5.3. Complete patient instruction forms (including an asthma action plan) as applicable
5.4. Present medical information effectively to the public or media about a medical issue
18 PEDIATRIC ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY

--- Page 23 ---
OUTCOMES AND COMPETENCIES
Collaborator
Definition: As collaborators, clinical immunologists and allergists effectively work within a
healthcare team to achieve optimal patient care.
Key and enabling competencies: clinical immunologists and allergists can…
1. Participate effectively and appropriately in an interprofessional healthcare team
1.1. Describe the clinical immunology and allergy subspecialist’s roles and responsibilities
to other professionals
1.2. Describe the roles and responsibilities of other professionals within the healthcare
team, including allergy clinic nurses, infusionists, asthma educators, dieticians,
pharmacists, school personnel, and workplace safety insurance boards
1.3. Recognize and respect the diversity of roles, responsibilities, and competencies of
other professionals in relation to their own
1.4. Work with others to assess, plan, provide and integrate care for individual patients (or
groups of patients)
1.5. Work with others to assess, plan, provide and review other tasks, such as research
problems, educational work, program review or administrative responsibilities
1.6. Participate in inter-professional team meetings
1.7. Enter relationships with other professions for the provision of quality care
1.8. Describe the principles of team dynamics
1.9. Respect team ethics, including confidentiality, resource allocation, and professionalism
1.10. Demonstrate leadership in a healthcare team, as appropriate
2. Work with other health professionals effectively to prevent, negotiate, and resolve
interprofessional conflict
2.1. Demonstrate a respectful attitude towards other colleagues and members of an
interprofessional team
2.2. Work with other professionals to prevent conflicts
2.3. Employ collaborative negotiation to resolve conflicts
2.4. Respect differences and address misunderstandings and limitations in other
professionals
2.5. Recognize one’s own differences, misunderstanding and limitations that may
contribute to interprofessional tension
2.6. Reflect on interprofessional team function
Leader
Definition: As a leader, clinical immunologists and allergists are integral participants in
healthcare organizations, organizing sustainable practices, making decisions about allocating
resources, and contributing to the effectiveness of the healthcare system.
Key and enabling competencies: clinical immunologists and allergists can…
1. Participate in activities that contribute to the effectiveness of their healthcare organizations
and systems
1.1. Work collaboratively with others in their organizations
1.2. Participate in systemic quality evaluation and improvement, such as patient safety
initiatives, quality improvement and risk management
1.3. Describe the structure and function of the healthcare system as it relates to clinical
immunology and allergy, including the roles of physicians
1.4. Describe principles of healthcare financing, including physician remuneration,
budgeting, and organizational funding
PEDIATRIC ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY 19

--- Page 24 ---
OUTCOMES AND COMPETENCIES
2. Manage their practice and career effectively
2.1. Set priorities and manage time to balance patient care, practice requirements, outside
activities and personal life
2.2. Manage a practice including finances and human resources
2.3. Implement processes to ensure personal practice improvement
2.4. Employ information technology appropriately for patient care
3. Allocate finite healthcare resources appropriately
3.1. Recognize the importance of just allocation of healthcare resources, balancing
effectiveness, efficiency, and access with optimal patient care
3.2. Apply evidence and management processes for cost-appropriate care
4. Serve in administration and leadership roles, as appropriate
4.1. Chair or participate effectively in committees and meetings
4.2. Lead or implement change in healthcare
4.3. Plan relevant elements of healthcare delivery (work schedules)
Health Advocate
Definition: As health advocates, clinical immunologists and allergists responsibly use their
expertise and influence to advance the health and well-being of individual patients,
communities, and populations.
Key and enabling competencies: clinical immunologists and allergists can…
1. Respond to individual patient health needs and issues as part of patient care
1.1. Identify the health needs of an individual patient
1.2. Identify opportunities for advocacy, health promotion and disease prevention with
individuals and their families
2. Respond to the health needs of the communities that they serve
2.1. Describe the practice communities that they serve
2.2. Identify opportunities for advocacy, health promotion and disease prevention in the
communities that they serve, and respond appropriately
2.3. Appreciate the possibility of competing interests between the communities served and
other populations
3. Identify the determinants of health for the populations that they serve
3.1. Identify the determinants of health of the populations, including barriers to access to
care and resources
3.1.1. Use evidence-based approach to identify determinants of health
3.2. Identify vulnerable or marginalized populations within those served and respond
appropriately
3.2.1. Identify populations at risk for allergic/immunologic diseases and apply current
evidence on treatment and prevention
4. Promote the health of individual patients, communities, and populations
4.1. Describe an approach to implementing a change in a determinant of health of the
populations they serve
4.2. Describe how public policy impacts on the health of the populations served
4.2.1. Describe how public health policy is developed
4.2.2. Identify how current policies affect patients with allergic and immunologic diseases
4.2.3. Demonstrate how policies can be changed because of physicians’ actions
4.3. Identify points of influence in the healthcare system and its structure
4.3.1. Describe key issues in the Saudi healthcare system
4.3.2. Describe how healthcare system changes might affect societal health outcomes
20 PEDIATRIC ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY

--- Page 25 ---
OUTCOMES AND COMPETENCIES
4.3.3. Advocate to decrease the burden of illness
4.3.4. Demonstrate effective use of a relevant specialty society, community-based
advocacy group, other public education bodies, or private organizations
4.4. Describe the ethical and professional issues inherent in health advocacy, including
altruism, social justice, autonomy, integrity, and idealism
4.5. Appreciate the possibility of conflict inherent in their role as a health advocate for a
patient or community with that of manager or gatekeeper
4.6. Describe the role of the medical profession in advocating collectively for health and
patients’ safety
Scholar
Definition: As scholars, clinical immunologists and allergists demonstrate a lifelong
commitment to reflective learning, as well as the creation, dissemination, application, and
translation of medical knowledge.
Key and enabling competencies: clinical immunologists and allergists can…
1. Maintain and enhance professional activities through ongoing learning
1.1. Describe the principles of maintenance of competence
1.2. Describe the principles and strategies for implementing a personal knowledge
management system
1.3. Recognize and reflect on learning issues in practice
1.4. Conduct a personal practice audit
1.5. Pose an appropriate learning question
1.6. Access and interpret the relevant evidence
1.7. Integrate new learning into practice
1.8. Evaluate the impact of any change in practice
1.9. Document the learning process
2. Critically evaluate medical information and its sources, and apply this appropriately to
practice decisions
2.1. Describe the principles of critical appraisal
2.2. Critically appraise retrieved evidence to address a clinical question
2.3. Integrate critical appraisal conclusions into clinical care
3. Facilitate the learning of patients, families, students, residents, other health professionals, the
public, and others, as appropriate
3.1. Describe principles of learning relevant to medical education
3.2. Identify collaboratively the learning needs and desired learning outcomes of others
3.3. Select effective teaching strategies and content to facilitate others’ learning
3.4. Demonstrate the ability to give an effective lecture or presentation
3.5. Assess and reflect on a teaching encounter
3.6. Provide and receive effective feedback
3.7. Describe the principles of ethics with respect to teaching
4. Contribute to the development, dissemination, and translation of new knowledge and
practices
4.1. Describe the principles of research and scholarly inquiry including:
4.1.1. Research principles
4.1.1.1. Test-performance characteristics: principles of sensitivity, specificity,
predictive value, and randomized controlled trial analyses
4.1.1.2. Experimental design
4.1.1.3. Data analysis and biostatistics
4.1.1.4. Epidemiology
PEDIATRIC ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY 21

--- Page 26 ---
OUTCOMES AND COMPETENCIES
4.1.1.5. Informed consent
4.1.1.6. Adverse event reporting
4.2. Research ethics
4.3. Pose a scholarly question relevant to the specialty of clinical immunology and allergy
4.4. Conduct a systematic search for evidence
4.4.1. Develop the skills to store and retrieve relevant literature
4.5. Select and apply appropriate methods to address the question
4.6. Disseminate the findings of a study
Professional
Definition: As professionals, clinical immunologists and allergists are committed to the health
and wellbeing of individuals and society through ethical practice, profession-led regulation, and
high personal standards of behavior.
Key and enabling competencies: clinical immunologists and Allergists can…
1. Demonstrate a commitment to their patients, profession, and society through ethical practice
1.1. Exhibit appropriate professional behaviors in practice, including honesty, integrity,
commitment, compassion, respect, altruism, punctuality, reliability, conscientiousness, and
self-awareness
1.2. Demonstrate a commitment to delivering the highest quality care and maintenance of
competence
1.3. Demonstrate a working knowledge of medical ethics, and recognize and appropriately
respond to ethical issues encountered in practice
1.4. Identify, declare, and manage conflicts of interest
1.5. Recognize the principles and limits of patient confidentiality as defined by professional
practice standards and the law
1.6. Maintain appropriate relations with patients
2. Demonstrate a commitment to their patients, profession, and society through participation in
profession-led regulation
2.1. Demonstrate knowledge and an understanding of the professional, legal, and ethical
codes of practice
2.2. Fulfill the regulatory and legal obligations required of current practice
2.3. Demonstrate accountability to professional regulatory bodies
2.4. Recognize and respond to others’ unprofessional behaviors in practice
2.5. Participate in peer review
3. Demonstrate a commitment to physician health and sustainable practice
3.1. Balance personal and professional priorities to ensure personal health and a
sustainable practice
3.2. Strive to heighten personal and professional awareness and insight
3.3. Recognize other professionals in need and respond appropriately 1
2.5. Continuum of learning
The following table illustrates the different milestones that should be acquired by the trainee at
every level of training and those expected to be accomplished by the end of training that will
qualify the trainee to work as a consultant.
permission. It was modified for the SaudiMed Framework and local program needs and requirements.
22 PEDIATRIC ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
