Document: 30. __Arthroscopy and Orthopedic Sport Injuries Fellowship__.pdf
Extraction Method: Improved CanMEDS Without Levels (layout-aware)
Pages Extracted: 7-24
Candidates Found: 2
Validation: Valid CanMEDS without levels (score: 263/268, 7/7 roles)
================================================================================

--- Page 7 ---
OBJECTIVES
“Learning outcomes”
The main objective for creating this curriculum map is to provide a core curriculum
for a two-years sports medicine fellowship. This fellowship will be a competency-based
training. CanMEDS roles will be utilized to structure the objectives of the training.
Because this is the first sport medicine fellowship to create in Saudi Arabia, a special
attention will be made in order to define and establish the appropriate objectives for
medical experts meets the community requirements at Saudi Arabia. Additionally, The
Orthopaedic Sports Medicine Fellowship Curriculum and Structure of American
Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine (AOSSM) will be used to guide us in building the
objectives for the medical expert role.
Communicator
The fellow will be able to:
a) Effectively demonstrate skills as a communicator and work and communicate
effectively with other physicians, allied health professionals, patients and families.
b) Deliver information to the patient and their support group in a way which is
understandable.
c) Demonstrate the ability to describe procedures to the patient and patient’s support
group.
d) The ability to obtain an appropriate informed consent for patients undergoing
interventions.
Collaborator
The fellow will be able to:
a) Show awareness of a team approach to the management of athletic problems
involving physician, surgeon, therapist, coach/trainer and nutritionist.

--- Page 8 ---
b) Interacts and consults effectively with all allied health professionals and
acknowledges their roles and expertise.
c) Understand and develop patient care plan with other members of the inter-
professional health care team.
d) Demonstrate the ability to work within an inter-professional team in regards to
research and administrative duties.
e) Delegate appropriately and effectively to other members of the healthcare team.
Manager
The fellow will be able to:
a) Cost effectively use of investigative tools and therapeutic modalities including
complementary and alternative therapies and procedures
b) Exhibit an ability to effectively organize his/her work and work effectively as part of a
team to ensure total and continuing care of his/her patients.
Health Advocate
The fellow will be able to:
a) Show an ability to act as an effective healthcare advocate for the patient, society, and
the community.
b) Recognize and understands the psychological, social, and physical determinants of
patient health.
c) Identify and advise on risk factors for prevention of injury including issues specific for
gender, age and return to activity
d) Counsel athletes on the risks and side effects of performance enhancing drugs and
substance abuse
Scholar
The fellow will be able to:
a) Develops an ability to critically evaluate and appraise medical literature.

--- Page 9 ---
b) Show an ability and interacts in teaching residents, medical students and allied
healthcare workers and patients.
c) Organize and successfully complete a research project.
Professional
The fellow will be able to:
a) Display dependability, reliability, honesty and is forthright with patients and
colleagues.
b) Display an understanding and sensitivity to age, gender, culture and ethnicity issues.
c) Display responsibility and self-discipline and punctuality.
d) Communicates with patients with compassion and empathy.
e) Recognizes his/her own limitations and is able to seek and give advice/assistance
when necessary.
f) Understand the principles and practice of biomedical ethics as it relates to sports
medicine and minimally invasive orthopedic surgery.
g) Demonstrate the ability to work within the scope of clinical and technical acumen and
obtains responsible and timely patient referrals.
h) Practice ethically consistent with the obligations of a physician and expectations of
the community in regards to gender, culture, ethnicity, race, spiritual values and
socioeconomic standard.
i) Demonstrate the ability to put patient and parents at ease and inspire confidence in
the treatment plan.

--- Page 10 ---
Medical expert focus content:
1. Knowledge
o Basic Science: gross anatomy, microanatomy, rehabilitation and kinesiology,
pathophysiology, tissue healing, inflammation, and cartilage
o Demonstrates knowledge of applied and functional anatomy (e.g.,
meniscopopliteal ligaments, Buford complex, zona obliqularis)
o Demonstrates knowledge of the details of rehabilitation protocols and
preventive techniques (e.g., ACL reconstruction, concussion, ankle sprains)
o Demonstrates knowledge of the details of tissue healing and cellular
physiology of treatment modalities (e.g., cartilage microfracture, platelet rich
plasma [PRP], corticosteroid injections)
o Musculoskeletal: acute and chronic orthopaedic disorders, acute non-
orthopaedic disorders, acute non-orthopaedic traumatic injuries (eye and ear)
o Demonstrates full knowledge and preventive measures of MSK conditions in
sports medicine (e.g., training biomechanics, braces, taping)
o Demonstrates knowledge of intervention techniques to prevent reinjures
o Demonstrates knowledge of surgical indications and variables associated with
surgical timing in athletes and non-operative management of the in-season
athlete
o Demonstrates complete knowledge of etiology, pathophysiology, treatment,
and prevention of complications
o Demonstrates knowledge of more advanced imaging studies for MSK
conditions
o Demonstrates full knowledge of routine and accessory portal placements and
associated complications

--- Page 11 ---
o Medical Issues: cardiopulmonary, skin, heat/cold intolerance, concussions,
gastrointestinal (GI)/GU, and gender-related
o Demonstrate full knowledge and preventive measures of medical conditions in
sports medicine (e.g., nutrition/supplements)
o Demonstrates knowledge in controversies and complications of medical
conditions in sports medicine
o Demonstrates full knowledge in return to play guidelines for common medical
conditions in sports medicine (e.g., H. gladatorium, mono, concussions)
2. Clinical skills
o Non-operative: history and physical examination, imaging interpretation,
common medical issues treatment and referral
o Independently provides patient care in all aspects of sports medicine
conditions
o Manages all musculoskeletal aspects and acute sports medicine injuries
o Refers medical sports medicine conditions to specialists (e.g., recurrent
concussions, hyphema, cardiomegaly, eating disorders) appropriately
o Correlates imaging studies with clinical findings
3. Operative Skills
o Performs all steps for primary reconstruction of the knee, shoulder, and ankle
(see the surgical cases logbook)
o Performs common revision reconstruction for the ACL, anterior shoulder, and
lateral ankle
o Performs surgical repair and reconstructive techniques for the hip, and ankle
(e.g. hip labral and femoroacetabular impingement [FAI] treatment)
o Recognizes, corrects, and avoids potential intra-operative complications

--- Page 12 ---
4. Working with inter-professional teams (consultants, certified athletic trainer,
physical therapist, occupational therapist, etc.) to enhance athletic care and safety
o Maintains a team approach and has situational awareness to the care of the
athlete
o Incorporates clinical quality improvement and athletic safety into clinical care
o Contributes to the reduction of risks of errors and promotes "speaking up" with
concerns by members of the inter-professional team

--- Page 13 ---
Curriculum’s contents
The AOSSM fellowship committee has established the ideal topics need to be
covered during the fellowship. These topics represent the core curriculum for the sport
medicine fellowship ideal curriculum. However, to address the gaps in the taught
curriculum’s contents, a prioritizing, categorizing and identifying the type of knowledge
and surgical skills required is considered important during preparing the curriculum’s
content.
A. Types of knowledge are required for surgical practice
Fundamentally, there are three types of knowledge: 1) knowing what (declarative
knowledge), 2) knowing how (procedural knowledge), and 3) knowing when and why
(conditional knowledge). Often confusing and potentially problematic for orthopaedic
education is the relationship between knowing how (procedural knowledge) and being
able to deal proficiently with a particular type of injury or illness. Command of all three
types of knowledge is required for surgical practice. Procedural knowledge (i.e. knowing
the steps one is to follow in doing a particular procedure) and being able to implement the
procedure proficiently are both important in orthopaedic sports medicine.
B. Prioritizing Levels of Knowledge, clinical and surgical skills For Curriculum
It was realized that the graduate of a fellowship program should handle certain
difficult and sports medicine cases in a highly proficient manner; others routinely and still
others only well enough to make a responsible referral. Similarly, graduates should
possess an in-depth understanding of certain types of knowledge from the basic sciences
because of their importance to the practice of sports medicine, while other optionally
relevant knowledge, which is not essential to this subspecialty, may be known at only a
minimal level.
The rating used in this curriculum applies functional ratings to topic areas. The
curriculum is designed to separate: 1) Topics which should be mastered by all fellows

--- Page 14 ---
(rating of “A”) with increasing proficiency and with increasingly complex and challenging
issues and problems during the fellowship. 2) Topics (rating “B”) in which fellows are not
expected to become proficient during the fellowship (rather they may assist experts in
managing such cases for which diagnosis and treatment procedures have only been
partly developed by the field). 3) Topics (rating “C”) pertaining to aspects of orthopaedic
sports medicine for which fellows are to learn to triage, since the topics are in “unknown
territory” from the perspective of orthopaedic sports medicine. Diagnosis and treatment of
such cases is typically left to the other experts. Table 1 shows some examples in how the
content of the curriculum will be prioritized.
C. Contents categories:
AOSSM curriculum topics will be utilized in this curriculum while some minor
adjustment regarding the categorizing and prioritizing of the topics in order to address the
preexisted gaps in this area. The contents of the curriculum focusing in medical expert
competency will cover all of surgical and medical aspect of sport medicine. Topic will
organize to cover the major joints of the body. Every topic related to the single joint will
be categorized in to three main categories: basic science, clinical, and surgical
knowledge and skills. In addition to that, the curriculum will include topics about medical
aspect of athletes’ health and sport medicine. Table 2 shows some examples of the
topics need to be covered in the curriculum

--- Page 15 ---
Surgical Cases Logbook
The AOSIF created a case Logbook for Orthopaedic Sports Medicine allows fellows to
document their operative experience during the 24-month educational program and enables
the fellowship Committee to monitor programs to ensure that fellows have an adequate volume
and variety of experiences appropriate for fellowship education. The Committee has identified
defined case categories (listed here on the following pages) as appropriate for the focused
education of orthopaedic sports medicine fellows.
To log a case, fellows will continue to identify the patient type (adult or pediatric), and must
also identify their role in the case as either Level 1 (primary or supervising fellow surgeon) or
Level 2 (assisting fellow surgeon). All procedures at both levels require appropriate faculty
member supervision and participation in the case. At this time, both Level 1 and Level 2
participation will count. The fellowship committee will continue to review the fellows’ Case Log
reports as a measure of the depth and breadth of fellow experience.
GLENOHUMERAL INSTABILITY
1 Diagnostic arthroscopy
1 Arthroscopic OR open anterior capsulorrhaphy; with labral repair
(e.g., Bankart procedure)
2 Arthroscopic OR open anterior capsulorrhaphy; with bone block
2 Arthroscopic OR open anterior capsulorrhaphy; with coracoid process
transfer
2 Arthroscopic OR open posterior capsulorrhaphy, with or without bone
block
2 Arthroscopic OR open Glenohumeral joint capsulorrhaphy for multi-
directional instability
2 Arthroscopic repair of SLAP lesion

--- Page 16 ---
ROTATOR CUFF
1 Arthroscopic OR open decompression of subacromial space with
acromioplasty, with or without coracoacromial ligament release
1 Arthroscopic OR open repair of acute ruptured musculotendinous cuff
(e.g., rotator cuff)
1 Arthroscopic OR open repair of chronic ruptured musculotendinous cuff
(e.g., rotator cuff)
2 Reconstruction of chronic massive rotator cuff tear
1 Arthroscopic OR open tenodesis of long tendon of biceps
1 Tenotomy of long tendon of biceps
ACOMIOCLAVICULAR INSTABILITY
1 Arthroscopic distal clavicle resection
1 Open distal clavicle resection
1 Open treatment of acromioclavicular dislocation, acute or chronic; with
or without tendon graft reconstruction (includes obtaining graft)
HIP ARTHROSCOPY
2 Diagnostic hip arthroscopy, with or without synovial biopsy
2 Diagnostic hip arthroscopy; with removal of loose body or foreign body
2 Diagnostic hip arthroscopy; with debridement/shaving of articular
cartilage (chondroplasty), abrasion arthroplasty, and/or resection of
labrum
2 Diagnostic hip arthroscopy; with synovectomy

--- Page 17 ---
KNEE INSTABILITY
1 Primary repair of torn collateral ligament
2 Primary repair (ORIF or arthroscopically) of avulsed cruciate ligament
(ACL or PCL)
2 Ligamentous reconstruction (augmentation) of PLC
2 Ligamentous reconstruction (augmentation) of the collateral ligaments
(MCL/LCL)
1 Arthroscopically aided anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
2 Arthroscopically aided posterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
KNEE MULTI-LIGAMENT REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
2 Open treatment of knee dislocation, with or without internal or external
fixation; with primary ligamentous repair or
augmentation/reconstruction
2 Arthroscopic treatment of knee dislocation with multiple ligaments
reconstruction
KNEE OSTEOTOMY
1 High tibial osteotomy for correction of genu varus
1 Distal femur osteotomy for correction of genu valgus
PATELLOFEMORAL INSTABILITY
1 MPFL reconstruction
1 Reconstruction of dislocating patella; with extensor realignment and/or
muscle advancement or release
1 Reconstruction of dislocating patella; with tibial tubercle and/or distal
femur osteotomy osteotomy
1 Arthroscopic lateral retinacular release
1 Arthroscopic or open treatment of acute patella dislocation with
osteochondral fracture+ ORIF or removal+ MPFL and medial retincular
repair

--- Page 18 ---
KNEE ARTICULAR CARTILAGE
1 Arthroscopic debridement/shaving of articular cartilage
(chondroplasty)
1 Arthroscopic microfracture
2 Arthroscopic/ open allograft osteochondral transplantation for OCD
2 Arthroscopic/ open osteochondral autograft transplantation (e.g.,
mosaicplasty) (includes harvesting of the autograft(s)
1 Arthroscopic drilling for osteochondritis dissecans with/without bone
grafting, with or without internal fixation (including debridement of
base of lesion)
MENISCUS
1 Arthroscopic partial, subtotal or total meniscectomy (medial OR lateral
including any meniscal shaving)
1 Arthroscopic meniscus all-inside repair (medial OR lateral)
2 Open meniscus repair inside-out or out-in (medial OR lateral)
FOOT AND ANKLE
1 Open or percutaneous primary repair ruptured Achilles tendon
1 Open repair of chronic ruptured Achilles tendon with graft reconstruction
1 Acute repair of superior peroneal retinaculum and deepening of the
fibular groove for dislocating peroneal tendons
1 Groove-deepening with soft tissue transfer and/or osteotomy for chronic
dislocating peroneal tendons
1 Primary repair/ reconstruction of disrupted lateral collateral ankle
ligament
1 Arthroscopic excision of osteochondral defect of talus and/or tibia,
including drilling
1 Open or Arthroscopically aided ORIF of large osteochondritis dissecans
lesion, talar dome fracture
1 Arthroscopic ankle joint debridment
1 Arthroscopic removal of loose body or foreign

--- Page 19 ---
Application requirements
Candidate for this fellowship will be an orthopaedic fellow who successfully
finished his/her residency-training program. A total of two fellows will be accepted in this
fellowship.
The following documents are required:
• KKUH Orthopaedic Sports Medicine Fellowship Application
• Current curriculum vitae
• Three letters of recommendation
• Saudi Orthopaedic Board Certificate or equivalent.

--- Page 20 ---
Structure & Rotation
The fellowship is two years in length. The program begins on March 1st and terminates
on Feburary 29. Fellows will spend the two-year in doing different rotations to cover most
aspect of sport medicine. Currently we have five surgeons with different expertise area in
different sport medicine subspecialties (shoulder + upper extremities, and Knee+ lower
extremities).
Most of the Fellowship is a one-on-one learning experience. This is accomplished by
assigning the Fellow to two of the sports medicine attending staff. While with this
attending, the Fellow's schedule mirrors the both attending staff's schedule which is two
days a week in the clinic, two days a week in the operating room, and one day free to
pursue research and prepare for conferences. This allows a very close exposure to the
attendings' thought processes regarding clinical evaluation and test ordering, decision
making in the clinic, preoperative counseling and preparation, intra-operative decision
making and post-operative decision making involving wound care, precautions, physical
therapy and activity progression. This exposure to the continuity of care for the athletic
patient care is important in the fellowship program.
Elective rotation:
Each fellow will have a chance to do an elective rotation (3-6 months) outside the KKUH.
Fellow can conduct this rotation only at accredited sports center with a qualified sports
medicine surgeon who is the arthroscopy and sports medicine represent at least more
than 80% of his practice.

--- Page 21 ---
Fellows’ Scholarly Activities
The KSU institution and AOSIF program will allocate all adequate educational resources to
facilitate fellow involvement in scholarly activities
Each fellow must demonstrate scholarship through at least one of the following activities:
1. Participation in sponsored research;
2. Preparation of an article for a peer-reviewed publication;
3. Presentation of research at a regional or national meeting; OR,
4. Participation in a structured literature review of an important topic.
As part of their educational experience, all fellows are required to perform a clinical
or laboratory research project (at least ONE) during the 2 years of training.
Completion of one scholarly activity is MUST and MANDATORY.

--- Page 22 ---
Learning resources, place, and events
Learning resources:
During the training and in addition to the formal teaching, fellows will have the chance to
get a free access to the educational resources, which are rich of educational materials
specifically related to sport medicine. Details of the learning resources are shown on
table 1.
Learning places and events
For orthopaedic surgeons to gain proficiency in sport medicine, an appropriate
setting for efficient learning and teaching is fundamental. Competency in surgical
arthroscopy and sport medicine typically develops during completion of the residency
curriculum as defined by the residency review committees, with standard of care as
defined by community norms. Additional training is often provided by focused fellowships
in arthroscopy and sports medicine. Therefore, a carful planning of teaching to address
gaps around residency teaching and exposure to sport medicine is crucial and should be
well planned.
In addition to learning and teaching take place at the operative room, clinics, and
attending international or local conferences and meetings, a structured and well planned
formal learning, which will be conducted through the two years curriculum.
• Weekly combined residents and fellows Case-Based Teaching:
• Teaching will take place at conference room.
• Supervised by the teaching faculty.
• Fellows will participate in preparing the clinical cases and teaching.
• Time protected teaching, where the fellows will be freed from any
clinical and surgical duties.

--- Page 23 ---
• Sport medicine rounds:
• Weekly at the conference room.
• Will be prepared and organized by chief residents and fellows and
supervised by teaching faculty.
• Only difficult and more challenging cases will be discussed.
• Journal club meeting:
• Monthly at one of the attending staff’s house or at the restaurant.
• Scope of teaching will be focus on research methodology, athletes’
population, and basic science research related to sport medicine.
• Simulation lab:
Traditional orthopaedic training in arthroscopy and sport medicine surgical skills has
relied heavily on the apprenticeship model in which fellows observe experienced
surgeons in the operating room and increase their level of involvement with subsequent
procedures. This method of learning is inefficient in terms of both time and cost, and it is
associated with patient morbidity. These concerns illustrate the limitations of the current
system and demonstrate a rationale for improving the acquisition of technical skill outside
the operating room. Therefore, alternative education tools like simulation (cadavers,
bench top model, and virtual reality) will be utilized in this fellowship.

--- Page 24 ---
Assessment
Purpose: The purposes of the assessment during the training are to:
o Support learning
o Develop professional growth
o Monitor progression
o Competency judgment and certification
o Evaluate the quality of the training programs
General Principles:
o Judgement should be based on holistic profiling of a trainee rather than individual traits
or instruments
o Assessment should be continuous in nature
o Trainee and faculty must meet together to review portfolio and logbook once every two
months and at the of a given rotation
o Assessment should be strongly linked to the curriculum and the content
Type of assessment:
o Formative:
o Self-assessment MCQ exam by AOSSM
o Continuous assessment including the workplace-based assessment
• 360-degree/Multi-source feedback
o Peer
o Nurse
! In-Patient nurses
! Out-Patient nurses
! ER nurses
